Martyrologium 2
by Usuard of Saint-Germain
Source text: Public Domain. English translation/apparatus/encoding: CC BY-NC 4.0, Wroot Press.
https://migne.app/pl/124/martyrologium-2/
----------------------------------------

THE MARTYROLOGY OF USUARDUS FOLLOWS.

## MAY HAS 31 DAYS.

## On the Kalends · 1 May

[0009]

In Egypt, of Hieremias the prophet, who, overwhelmed with stones by the people, fell at Taphnae. Also, the birthday of the blessed apostles Philip and James, of whom Philip, after he had converted almost all Schytia to the faith of Christ, rested with a glorious end at Hierapolis, a city of Asia. But James, who is also read to be the brother of the Lord, was buried beside the temple of Jerusalem, where also he had been cast down headlong. In the Gauls, in the territory *Vivariensis*, of blessed Andeolus, subdeacon, whom Saint Policarpus sent from the East together with others to preach the word of God in Gaul; and the emperor Severus, having learned of his preaching, ordered him, most cruelly scourged with thorny cudgels, to be thrust into prison, and so at last his head to be split in the form of a cross with a wooden sword. In the city *Sedunensis*, the birthday of Sigismundus, king. At the city of Auscium, of Saint Orientis, bishop, who, adorned with virtues, is written to have rested in a holy end. Also at Auxerre, of Saint Amator, bishop and confessor.

## The sixth day before the Nones · 2 May

[0013]

The birthday of our holy Father Athanasius, bishop of the city of Alexandria, and confessor. For his persecution almost the whole world conspired, and the princes of the earth were moved, and nations, kingdoms and armies came together against him; and having suffered many plots of the Arians, he is driven a fugitive through the whole world, nor was any safe place left him for hiding, while all are set in motion to track him down. He dies, however, in the forty-sixth year of his priesthood, after many contests and many crowns of patience, in the time of Valentinian and Valens. On the same day, of Saints Saturninus and Neopolis, who rested in prison.

## The fifth day before the Nones · 3 May

[0015]

At Jerusalem, the finding of the holy Cross by Queen Helena, under the emperor Constantine. At Rome, on the Numentan Way, the passion of blessed Alexander, pope, and of Eventius and Theodolus, presbyters, under the emperor Hadrian; of whom the first, after chains, prisons, the rack, the claw and fires, was slain by very frequent piercings over all his limbs. [0017] The following ones also, after a long endurance of prison, were tried by fire, and at the last beheaded. On this same day, of Saint Juvenalis, bishop and confessor.

## The fourth day before the Nones · 4 May

[0019]

In Palestine, in the city of Gaza, the birthday of blessed Silvanus, bishop of the same city: who, in the persecution of Diocletian, was crowned with martyrdom with very many of his clergy. At Jerusalem, the passion of Saint Quiriacus, bishop, under the emperor Julian. Also in the mines *Fanensis*, of the forty holy martyrs, who were beheaded together. At Nicomedia, the birthday of Antonia, martyr, who, exceedingly tortured and afflicted with various torments, hung by one arm for three days and thrust into prison for two years, at the last was burned up with flames in the confession of the Lord. In Noricum Ripense, of Saint Florianus, who by the governor's order was cast headlong into the river Anisius with a stone tied to his neck. At Auxerre, of Saint Curcodemus, deacon.

## The third day before the Nones · 5 May

[0023]

At Alexandria, of Saint Euthimius, deacon, resting in prison. At Thessalonica, the birthday of Saints Hireneus, Peregrinus and Hirene, burned with fires. In the Gauls, in the city of Arles, of blessed Hilary, bishop and confessor, a most illustrious and most noble man. Also at Vienne, of Saint Niceti, bishop, a man of venerable holiness. At Auxerre, the passion of Saint Jovinianus, reader and martyr.

## The day before the Nones · 6 May

[0027]

The birthday of blessed John the apostle, when, brought from Ephesus to Rome by order of Domitian, and in the presence of the senate before the Latin Gate, he was put into a jar of boiling oil, but was not in the least harmed. Where the faithful peoples make a festal gathering on the same day to this day. At Antioch, of Saint Evodius, who, as blessed Ignatius writes, was ordained the first bishop there by the Apostles. He ended his life by a glorious martyrdom in the same city. Also of Saint Lucius the Cyrenian, who was appointed the first bishop at Cyrene by the holy Apostles, whom blessed Luke commemorates in the Acts of the apostles. In Africa, of the holy martyrs Heliodorus, Venustus, with seventy-five others.

## On the Nones · 7 May

[0029]

At Terracina, a city of Campania, the birthday of blessed Domitilla, virgin and martyr, who, being the niece, by his sister, of Flavius Clemens the Consul, and consecrated with the sacred veil by Saint Clement, was carried off into exile to the island of Pontia in the persecution of Domitian, with very many others, and there endured a long martyrdom. Last of all, when by her teaching and miracles she had converted very many to the faith of the Lord, the chamber being set on fire by a certain judge, in which she was dwelling shut up together with her fellow virgins, namely Eufrosina and Theodora, she completed the course of her glorious martyrdom. On the same day, of Saint Juvenalis, martyr. At Nicomedia, the passion of Saints Flavius, Augustus and Augustinus, brothers.

## The eighth day before the Ides · 8 May

[0033]

At Milan, the birthday of Saint Victor, martyr, who, a Christian from his earliest age, when he was a soldier in the imperial camp, and Maximian was compelling him to sacrifice, persevering most bravely in the confession of the Lord, was first grievously beaten with cudgels, but, God protecting him, free of pain; then drenched with molten lead, but not harmed at all; last of all he completed the course of his glorious martyrdom by the cutting off of his head. At Egypt, of Saints Stephen and Victor.

## The seventh day before the Ides · 9 May

[0035]

The festival of blessed Andrew the apostle, when his most sacred body, together with the bones of Saints Luke the evangelist and Timothy the disciple of Saint Paul, was translated to Constantinople under the emperor Constantius. At Rome, the birthday of Saint Hermes, whom the apostle Paul, writing to the Romans, mentions. He, worthily sacrificing himself to God, and made a victim acceptable to God, most clearly grounded in virtues, sought the kingdoms of heaven. At the town of Nazanzus, of blessed Gregory, bishop, surnamed the Theologian, who after many teachings, ordaining a bishop in his own place, as Jerome, instructed by him in the divine books, reports, practised the life of a monk in the country. In Persis, of the three hundred and ten holy martyrs. At the fort of Vindicinum, the deposition of the blessed confessor.

## The sixth day before the Ides · 10 May

[0039]

Of Job the prophet. At Rome, on the Latin Way, the birthday of the holy martyrs Gordianus and Epimachus, of whom the former, for the confession of the name of Christ, in the time of Julian, is long beaten with leaded scourges, and at the last is cut off by the head. Also at Rome, of blessed Calepodius, presbyter, under the emperor Alexander, who caused him to be slain with the sword and his body to be dragged through the city and thrown into the Tiber. There was beheaded also Palmatius the consul, with his wife and sons and forty-two others of both sexes; with whom also Simplicius the senator. Whose heads were ordered to be hung up at the various gates of the city of Rome, as an example to the Christians. Also at Rome, on the Latin Way, at the Hundred Halls, the birthday of Saints Quartus and Quintus.

## The fifth day before the Ides · 11 May

[0043]

At Rome, on the Salarian Way, the birthday of blessed Anthimus, presbyter, who after the distinctions of virtues and of preaching, cast headlong into the Tiber and rescued from it by an angel, was restored to his own oratory; thereafter punished by the loss of his head, he passed as victor to the heavens. At Vienne, of Saint Mamertus, bishop and confessor, who, on account of an impending disaster, instituted the solemn Litanies before the Ascension of the Lord.

## The fourth day before the Ides · 12 May

[0045]

At Rome, on the Ardeatine Way, the birthday of the holy martyrs Nereus and Achilleus, brothers, who first underwent a long exile on the island of Pontia, and afterwards were handled by a certain judge with most grievous blows; then, when they were being compelled with the rack and flames to sacrifice, and said that they, baptized by blessed Peter the apostle, could by no means sacrifice to idols, they were beheaded. Also on the Aurelian Way, of Saint Pancratius, martyr, who, when he was fourteen years old, under Diocletian, completed his martyrdom by the cutting off of his head. On the same day, of Saint Dionisius, uncle of the same blessed Pancratius, who, with heavenly rewards, dear and worthy to God, closed the day of this life in peace. At Cyprus, of our holy father Epiphanius, bishop of Salamina.

## The third day before the Ides · 13 May

[0049]

The birthday of Saint Mary at the Martyrs, when blessed Boniface the pope dedicated a church in honour of Mary ever virgin and of all the martyrs. Also of blessed Mucius, presbyter and martyr, who, first in the city of Amfibuli afflicted with many pains and torments in the confession of Christ, afterwards brought as far as Byzantium, fell by capital sentence. On this same day, of Saint Servatius, bishop of the Church *Tungrensis* and confessor; for the showing of whose merit to men, when in the time of winter the snow filled all things round about, it never covered his sepulchre, until, by the diligence of the citizens, a basilica was built over it.

## The day before the Ides · 14 May

[0051]

In the Gauls, in the city of Cimela, the birthday of Pontius, martyr, by whose preaching and diligence, after the two emperors Philip were converted to the faith of Christ, he himself also, under the emperors Valerian and Gallienus, obtained the palm of martyrdom. In Syria, of the holy martyrs Victor and Corona, under the emperor Antoninus; which Corona, since she was the wife of a certain man, and had begun to call Saint Victor blessed on account of the constancy of his martyrdom, saw two crowns fallen from heaven, one sent to Victor and the other to herself. And when she was declaring this also in the hearing of all, [0053] she indeed was torn apart between trees, but Victor was beheaded. On the same day, of our holy Father Pachomius, who, being distinguished by deeds of apostolic grace, and founder of the monasteries of Egypt, wrote rules for monks, which he had learned at an angel's dictation.



## On the Ides · 15 May

[0055]

The birthday of the holy confessors Torquatus, Tesifon, Secundus, Indalecius, Cecilius, Esicius, Eufrasius, who were ordained at Rome by the holy apostles, and sent to preach the word of God to the Spains, at that time still entangled in the error of the gentiles. And when they had evangelized in divers cities and had subjected innumerable multitudes to the faith of Christ, Torquatus at Acci, Tesifon at Vergium, Secundus at Abula, Indalecius at Urci, Cecilius at Heliberri, Esicius at Carcesi, Eufrasius at Eliturgi, rested. At the island of Chios, of blessed Isidore, martyr, in whose basilica there stands a well, into which also he is said to have been cast, from whose water the sick, often given to drink, are made whole. At Lamosacum, the passion of Saints Peter and Andrew, Paul and Dionisia.

## The seventeenth day before the Kalends · 16 May

[0059]

In the province of Isauria, the birthday of Saints Aquilinus and Victorianus, whose acts are extant. At Auxerre, of blessed Peregrinus, bishop, the first of that city, who, punished by capital sentence, merited an everlasting crown. In the district *Forojuliensis*, of Saint Maxima, virgin, who, renowned for many virtues, rested in peace.

## The sixteenth day before the Kalends · 17 May

[0061]

In Tuscia, of Saint Torpes, martyr. He was at first great in the service of Nero Caesar; but afterwards, for the faith of Christ, at the order of the same man he is struck with blows of the hand, is afflicted with scourgings for a very long time, and is handed over to be devoured by beasts, but is not in the least harmed; at length, however, he completed his martyrdom by beheading on the third day before the Kalends of May. But nevertheless his festival is more solemnly kept here. In the city of Nivedunum, of Saints Eraclius, Paul, Aquilinus, with two others.

## The fifteenth day before the Kalends · 18 May

[0065]

In Egypt, of Saint Dioscorus, reader, upon whom the governor exercised many and various torments, so that he dug out his nails and set his sides aflame with torches; but the attendants, terrified by the brightness of a heavenly light, fell down; last of all, burned with glowing plates, he consummated his martyrdom. On this same day, of Saint Felix, bishop, who at the city *Spellatensis*, under the emperor Maximian, obtained the palm of martyrdom.

## The fourteenth day before the Kalends · 19 May

[0067]

At Rome, on the Appian Way, the birthday of Saints Calocerus and Parthenius, eunuchs, of whom the former was chamberlain of the emperor Decius, the other primicerius; refusing to sacrifice to idols, they were slain by the same man. Also at Rome, of Saint Potentiana, virgin, who, after innumerable contests, after the burials of many martyrs reverently performed, after all her means were paid out to the poor for Christ, at length passed from earth to the heavens. On the same very day, of blessed Pudens, father of the aforesaid virgin, who, clothed with Christ in baptism by the apostles, kept and preserved the innocent tunic unto the crown of a spotless life.

## The thirteenth day before the Kalends · 20 May

[0071]

At Rome, on the Salarian Way, the birthday of Saint Basilla, virgin and martyr, who, since she was of royal stock and had a most illustrious betrothed, was accused by him of being a Christian, and it was decreed by Gallienus Augustus that she should either receive her betrothed or perish by the sword. Being summoned about this, and refusing to give assent, she was pierced through with the sword. In the Gauls, in the city of Nemausus, of Saint Baudelius, martyr, who, when he was seized and would not sacrifice, and persisted immovable in the faith of Christ amid blows and torments, received the palm of martyrdom by a precious death. At Bourges, of blessed Austregisilus, bishop and confessor.

## The twelfth day before the Kalends · 21 May

[0073]

In Mauritania Caesariensis, the birthday of Saints Timotheus, Polius and Eutichius, deacon, who, sowing the word of the Lord in the aforesaid region, merited to be crowned together. Also at Caesarea of Cappadocia, the birthday of Saints Polyeuctus, Victorius and Donatus. At Cordoba, of Secundinus [nt: Saint Secundinus occupies an erasure in the codex. What saint, man or woman, once stood in his place? Yet with no difference in the scripts. Bouillart.], martyr.

## The eleventh day before the Kalends · 22 May

[0077]

In Africa, the birthday of Saints Castus and Emilius, who, as blessed Cyprian writes in the book On the Lapsed, consummated their martyrdom through the fire of the passion. At Corsica, of Saint Julia, who was crowned with the punishment of the cross. At Auxerre, of Helena, virgin.

## The tenth day before the Kalends · 23 May

[0079]

At Langres, the passion of Saint Desiderius, bishop. He, when he saw his people harried by the army of the Wandals, going out to make supplication for them, was at once ordered to be slain; and he, who willingly stretched out his neck for the sheep entrusted to him, was struck with the sword and passed to Christ. There suffered with him also many others of the number of his flock, and they were buried in the same city.

## The ninth day before the Kalends · 24 May

[0081]

The birthday of Manahen, foster-brother of Herod the tetrarch, a teacher and prophet under the grace of the New Testament, resting in Christ at Antioch. Also of most blessed Joanna, wife of Chuza, the steward of Herod, whom the Evangelists commemorate. At Portus Romanus, the birthday of Saint Vincent, martyr. In the Gauls, in the city of Namnetis, of the blessed martyrs Donatianus and Rogatianus, brothers, who for the constancy of their faith were put into prison, and [0083] hung up on the scaffold of the rack and torn, then pierced through with a soldier's lance; last of all their heads were cut off. At Histria, of the holy martyrs Zoellus, Servilius, Felix, Silvanus and Diocles.

## The eighth day before the Kalends · 25 May

[0085]

At Rome, on the Numentan Way, the birthday of blessed Urbanus, pope and martyr, by whose teaching, under the persecution of Alexander, many were crowned with martyrdom. At Milan, of Saint Dionisius, bishop and confessor, who, condemned to exile in Cappadocia for the Catholic faith, rested there at first; but afterwards the relics of his body, received through Saint Basil, bishop of the aforesaid city, blessed Ambrose laid to rest with fitting honour. At Mesia, in the city of Dorostorum, of the holy martyrs Passecratis. Valentio, and two others crowned together. In the territory of Troyes, of Saint Leo, confessor.

## The seventh day before the Kalends · 26 May

[0089]

At Athens, the birthday of blessed Quadratus, bishop, disciple of the Apostles, who, in the persecution of Hadrian, gathering together by his faith and diligence the Church scattered by great terror, also published a book in defence of the Christian religion, full of faith and worthy of Apostolic doctrine. At Rome, of the holy martyrs Simmitrius, presbyter, and twenty-two others. On this same day also, of Saint Quadratus, martyr, on whose solemnity sermons of Saint Augustine are found to have been delivered. At Tuder of Tuscia, the birthday of Saints Felicissimus, Eraclius, Paulinus. In the territory of Auxerre, the passion of Saint Priscus, martyr, with a vast multitude. In the Britains, of Saint Augustine, bishop and confessor, who, sent by blessed Pope Gregory, first preached the Gospel of Christ to the nation of the English.

## The sixth day before the Kalends · 27 May

[0093]

At Mesia, in the city *Dorostorensis*, the birthday of blessed Julius, who, in the time of persecution, being a veteran and of completed service, was seized by the officials and brought before the judge; in whose presence, when he cursed the idols and most constantly confessed the name of Christ, he was punished by capital sentence. In the Gauls, in the city *Arausica*, of Saint Eutropius, bishop, whose life, illustrious with virtues and miracles, Verus the bishop describes in a splendid discourse. In the territory *Adartensis*, of Saint Ragnulfus, martyr.

## The fifth day before the Kalends · 28 May

[0095]

At Rome, the birthday of blessed John, pope, whom Saint Gregory relates to have been first held in custody for the orthodox faith, and then brought even to death, with other equally catholic men. In the city of Paris, the passing of Saint Germanus, confessor. Of how great holiness and how great merit this blessed bishop of the same city was, and by what miracles also he shone, Fortunatus the bishop has set forth with a truthful pen. In Sardinia, of Saints Aemilius, Felix, Priamus, Lucianus. On the same day, of Saint Charaunus, who at the city of Carnotum, his head being cut off, took up martyrdom.

## The fourth day before the Kalends · 29 May

[0099]

At Iconium, a city of Isauria, under the emperor Aurelian, the passion of Saint Conon, martyr, and of his son, who, first placed upon red-hot iron, then, with live coals set beneath and oil poured over, constantly overcame the gridiron. But afterwards, having suffered the frying-pan as well as the hanging on the rack, and the want of fire, their hands at the last crushed with a wooden mallet [nt: In the codex all these words, *But afterwards, having suffered the frying-pan as well as the hanging on the rack, and the want of fire, with a wooden mallet at the last*, lie on an erasure. Yet all the codices show the same. This erasure, therefore, is older than any copy of Usuardus's Martyrology. Bouillart.], they gave up the spirit in praise of almighty God. On the same day, of Saints Sisinnius, Martyrius, and Alexander, who in the parts of Anaunia, as Saint Paulinus writes, the gentile men persecuting them, obtained the crown of martyrdom. At Trier, of blessed Maximinus, bishop and confessor, by whom the bishop Athanasius, fleeing the persecution of Constantius, was honourably received. At Rome, on the Aurelian Way, the birthday of Saint Restitutus. On the Tiburtine Way, of seven brothers.

## The third day before the Kalends · 30 May

[0101]

At Rome, on the Aurelian Way, the birthday of blessed Felix, pope, who, when he had ruled the Church for five years, was crowned with martyrdom under the emperor Claudius. At Turres of Sardinia, of the holy martyrs Gabinus and Crispolus. On this same day, of Saint Hucbertus, bishop and confessor.

## The day before the Kalends · 31 May

[0105]

At Rome, of Saint Petronilla, virgin, who, after many miracles of healing, when a certain Count wished to join her to himself in marriage, asking a respite of three days, and giving herself to fastings and prayers, on the third day, as soon as she received the Sacrament of Christ, gave up her spirit. At the city of Aquileia, the birthday of the holy martyrs Cantius, Cantianus and Cantianilla, brothers, who, since they drew their descent from the family of the Anicii, were beheaded for the constancy of the Christian faith, together with their tutor Protus. At Turres of Sardinia, of Crescentianus, martyr.



## JUNE HAS 30 DAYS.

[0109]

## On the Kalends · 1 June

[0109]

At Rome, the dedication of Saint Nicomedes, presbyter and martyr. At Caesarea of Palestine, under the persecution of Maximinus, of blessed Pamphilus, presbyter and martyr, whose Life Eusebius, bishop of Caesarea, set down in three books. And Saint Jerome also writes that he found certain volumes written out by his hand, which, he says, I embrace and keep with such joy that I believe I possess the riches of Cresus. At Augustodunum, of Saints Reverianus, bishop, and Paul, presbyter, with ten others, who were crowned with martyrdom under the emperor Aurelian. On this same day, of Saint Caprasius, abbot of the monastery *Lirinensis*. [Bouillart adds: [nt: This dedication of the crypts is so proper to the Church of Saint-Germain that it is no wonder it was passed over by those who copied out the Martyrology of Usuardus. Yet for Sollerius it is argument enough that that long passage is not to be ascribed to Usuardus, that almost all the other codices are against it, and above all the Pratensis B, in which Sirmond testified that it was erased. This last reason, I confess, ought to have given Sollerius some trouble. But he is at fault all the same when for that cause he denies that it was written by Usuardus, which the perfect likeness of the script persuades was written by him. Was the knot hard to untie? He should have waited a while and held himself back; he should have inquired by letter what the crypts are in Usuardus; why that dedication is announced once and again; why the Pratensis codex B passes it over in silence. These things belonged to an accurate editor. I untie the knot in a few words. Where there is now seen, built in the monastery of Saint-Germain, the most elegant chapel of the Blessed Virgin Mary, there were once crypts, or underground altars, the feast day of whose dedication was kept, in Usuardus's time, on the Kalends of June. Afterwards the same dedication was celebrated on the fourth day before the Ides, as is plain from the Pratensis codices; and at length it ceased to be celebrated, after the chapel of Blessed Mary was raised in the place of the crypts by Hugh of Issy, abbot of the monastery of the Prés. Now if Sollerius should ask why the commemoration of that dedication was deleted in the Pratensis codex B, the reason is ready to hand. When the altars were destroyed, which happened while that codex was in use, their dedication ceased to be announced; and hence it came about that the more recent codices, those written within these four hundred years, omitted it altogether. Bouillart.] At Paris, in the monastery of blessed Germanus, the dedication of the crypts in honour and veneration of Mary the Mother of God and of blessed Peter the apostle, and of the holy martyrs Georgius, Aurelius and Nathalia. Where the principal altar is consecrated to the name of the same virgin and of blessed Peter and of all the apostles: and at the head of the holy martyrs there is an altar in honour of Saint Michael and of all the blessed heavenly powers; and at their feet, of Saints Vincentius, Sebastian, Christophorus, Andochius, Tirsus and Felix. There is there also an altar in honour of Macharius Dionysius, Rusticus and Eleutherius and of all the holy martyrs. And another of Saint Marcellus, of Genevieve the virgin, of Savinus, Audoenus, Ansbertus and of all the confessors and virgins.

## The fourth day before the Nones · 2 June

[0113]

At Rome, the birthday of the blessed martyrs Marcellinus, presbyter, and Peter, exorcist, who, instructing many in prison unto the faith, after harsh chains and very many torments were beheaded under the judge Serenus. At Lyon, of Saints Fotinus, bishop of the same city, Zacharias, presbyter, Sanctus, deacon, Epagatus, Maturus, Attalus, Albina, Grata, with forty others. All these servants of Christ, as is written in the ecclesiastical history, were crowned together. There suffered also Saint Blandina, of their company, who, beaten with torments on the first, second and third day, when she was not overcome, on the fourth was driven with blows, burned on gridirons, and, having suffered many other things, at the last is slain with the sword.

## The third day before the Nones · 3 June

[0117]

In Campania, the birthday of Saint Herasmus, bishop and martyr; he, under Diocletian Augustus, first grievously bruised with leaded scourges, then with cudgels, afterwards drenched with resin, sulphur, lead, pitch, wax and oil, appeared unharmed. Then under Maximian, tormented with divers and most savage punishments, at length, the Lord calling him, he rested in a holy end. At Aretium, a city of Tuscia, of the holy martyrs Pergentinus and Laurentinus, brothers, who, in the persecution of Decius, when they were boys, after harsh punishments endured and great miracles shown, were cut down with the sword. In the city of Cordoba, of blessed Isaac, monk, who, when he was twenty-seven years old, was slain with the sword for the faith of Christ. In the territory of Orléans, of Saint Lifardus, presbyter.

## The day before the Nones · 4 June

[0119]

At Illiricum, in the city of Siscia, the birthday of blessed Quirinus, bishop, who, for the faith of Christ, as Prudentius writes, a millstone tied to his hand, was cast headlong into a river, and, having long spoken with those standing round, lest they be terrified by his example, scarcely obtained by prayers that he might be drowned. [Bouillart adds: [nt: Here I make no complaint of Castellanus. Nay, in this place he seems to have been more favourable to the Pratensis codex than was fair. For as far as I can conjecture from Sollerius's observations on this and the following day, and from his preface, that learned writer was not advised that a leaf had been torn out of the Pratensis codex and another sewn in its place. Perhaps Castellanus's eyes were deceived by a parchment equally worn, an ink equally faded, a form of letters not much alike, so that he took the hand for nearly coeval and the same, with no difference. But our cause rests on firmer supports than that we should need to hide anything, especially since a blemish of this kind favours it more than it tells against it. For by it the age, elegance and dignity of the rest of the codex shine out the more, as shadows add grace to pictures. So on these days, the 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th, I leave the codex to Sollerius's judgement. Let him correct, change, add, take away; it is nothing to me. Bouillart.] In the city of Nivedunum, of Saints Zoticus, Attalus and Euticus.]

## On the Nones · 5 June

[0123]

At Egypt, the birthday of the holy martyrs Marcianus, Nicander and Apollonius, whose acts are extant. On the same day, the passion of Saint Boniface, martyr, who suffered under Diocletian and Maximian at the city of Tarsus, but was buried at Rome on the road which is called the Latin. He, when he had long been mingled in fornication, at length pricked at heart by the divine will, not only deserted the vice to which he was subject, but also ran ardently through divers torments to the palm of martyrdom. Also of Saint Boniface, bishop, who, coming from the Britains and evangelizing the faith of Christ to the nations, when he had subjected a very great multitude in Frisia to the Christian religion, last of all slain with the sword, consummated his martyrdom with Eobanus the bishop and other servants of God.

## The eighth day before the Ides · 6 June

[0127]

The birthday of blessed Philip, who was one of the seven deacons. He, renowned for signs and wonders, rested at Caesarea, and beside him lie buried his three virgin daughters, prophetesses. At Tarsus of Cilicia, of twenty martyrs, in the times of Diocletian and Maximian, who through divers punishments glorified the Lord in their bodies. At Rome, of Saints Artemius with his wife Candida and his daughter Paulina. Which Artemius was struck with the sword; but his wife and daughter were overwhelmed with stones. In the city of Nivedunum, of Saints Amantius and Alexander.

## The seventh day before the Ides · 7 June

[0129]

At Constantinople, the birthday of blessed Paul, bishop of the same city, who, driven into exile by the emperor Constantius for the catholic faith, to a certain little city of Cappadocia, Cucusa by name, cruelly strangled by the plots of the Arians, passed to the heavenly kingdoms. Also at Cordoba, of Saints Peter, presbyter, Aventius, Hieremias and three others.

## The sixth day before the Ides · 8 June

[0131]

In the Gauls, in the city of Suessionis, the birthday of blessed Medard, bishop *Noviomensis*, of what great merit he was, was shown when at his death the heavens were opened, and divine lights flashed before him. On the same day, of Saint Gildardus, bishop of Rouen. Also at Senones, of Saint Eraclius, bishop and confessor. In Sardinia, of Saint Salustianus. At Cordoba, of Saint Abundius, presbyter and martyr.

## The fifth day before the Ides · 9 June

[0135]

At Rome, on the Caelian hill, the birthday of Saints Primus and Felicianus, under the emperors Diocletian and Maximian. These most glorious martyrs, leading a long life in the Lord, and bearing now the same torments together, now different and exquisite ones severally, at length, put to the sword, consummated the course of their happy fight. In the Gauls, in the city of Agennum, the passion of blessed Vincent, levite and martyr. Also in Scotia, of Saint Columba, presbyter and confessor, a man of great and wonderful virtue. At Nicea, of Saint Diomedes. *Bouillart adds:* [At the monastery of Saint Germanus, the dedication [nt: This mention of the dedication seemed to Sollerius by no means Usuardus's, since very many codices are silent about it, since Sirmond testifies that it was struck out of the Pratensis B, and lastly since Castellanus avows that it seemed to him added in a more recent hand. But in a matter which belongs to the monastery of Saint Germanus alone, what does the silence of other codices prove? Nor has Sirmond's observation any weight. After the oratory of blessed Peter was destroyed and burned by the Northmen along with the basilica of Saints Vincent and Germanus, the solemnity of the dedication ceased at the same time, and so too the making of any mention of it in the codex that was read in chapter. What, lastly, shall I say of Castellanus's advice? It wearies me to be forever harping on the same parchment, the same ink, the same hand: I leave the fiction to be refuted by the eyes. Bouillart.] of an oratory in honour of blessed Peter the apostle.]

## The fourth day before the Ides · 10 June

[0139]

At Rome, on the Aurelian Way, the birthday of Saints Basilides, Tripos, and Madalis, under the emperor Aurelian, the governor being Plato, and of twenty other martyrs. On the same day, on the Salarian Way, the passion of blessed Getulus, a most illustrious and most learned man, and of his companions Cerealis, Amantius and Primitivus, who by order of the emperor Hadrian were first beaten, then shut up in prison, lastly given over to burning. At Nicomedia, of Saint Zacharias. At Auxerre, of Saint Censurius, bishop and confessor.

[Bouillart adds: [nt: Here Sollerius gives a signal example of fairness. I have already observed, and not once only, that the silence of his own codices is for him the rule by which he judges the Pratensis: and that accordingly the saints whom he does not find in his own were added to it in a more recent hand. But to be consistent with himself, he draws over to his side even those additions which no one has ever denied to be at least three centuries later than Usuardus. What could be more unjust? He had been advised, beyond doubt, by Castellanus that Landericus was added in a more recent hand. Could he, or should he, on that account refuse to count the Pratensis among the pure codices? For my part I believe, such is his severity, that he would have dealt no more mildly with the Pratensis if one of ours had set Saints Francis of Assisi, Ignatius Loyola, Teresa, or other saints within our memory into its empty spaces. Bouillart.] At Paris, of Saint Landericus, bishop and confessor. On the same day, at the monastery of Saint Germanus, the dedication of the crypts in honour of blessed Mary the Mother of God and of blessed Michael the archangel and of all the heavenly powers, and of the holy apostles Peter and Paul, and of all the apostles and evangelists, and also of all holy virgins. There is there also an altar of Macharius, of Dionysius and his companions, and of Saint Urbanus, pope and martyr, and of all the martyrs. And another of Saints Georgius, Aurelius and Praejectus, martyrs, and of the holy confessors Martin, Nicolaus, Marcellus, Ansbertus, and of Saints Caecilia, Genevieve, Nathalia and all the confessors of Christ.]

## The third day before the Ides · 11 June

[0143]

The birthday of Saint Barnabas the apostle, who, being a Cypriot, was ordained apostle of the gentiles with Paul. His body was found in the time of the emperor Zeno, he himself revealing it. At Aquileia, the passion of Saints Felix and Fortunatus, under the persecution of Diocletian and Maximian, who, being two brothers german, were hung upon the rack, and burning torches were set about their sides; which being presently extinguished by the power of God, they were drenched through the belly with boiling oil, and at the last were cut off by the head in the confession of Christ.

## The day before the Ides · 12 June

[0145]

At Milan, the birthday of blessed Nazarius, martyr, whom Anolinus, under the fury of the persecution which was stirred up by Nero, long bruised and afflicted in prison, with whom the most holy boy Celsus, whom the same man had brought up, he ordered to be struck with the sword. Their bodies, as Saint Paulinus writes, when they had lain hidden until the times of the emperors Honorius and Arcadius, blessed Ambrose, the Lord revealing them, found. Also at the aforesaid city, of the holy martyrs Basilides, Cirinus, and Nabor.

## On the Ides · 13 June

[0149]

At Rome, on the Ardeatine Way, the birthday of Saint Felicula, virgin and martyr, who, unwilling to marry, nor to sacrifice to idols, was handed over to a certain vicar, who caused her, persevering in the confession of Christ, after a dark custody and the want of hunger, to be raised on the rack, and so at last to be taken down and cast headlong into a sewer. On the same day, of Saint Fandila, presbyter, who at the city of Cordoba, his head being cut off, took up martyrdom.

## The eighteenth day before the Kalends · 14 June

[0151]

Of Heliseus the prophet, who is laid at Samaria of Palestine (as blessed Jerome writes), where also Abdias the prophet rests. At Caesarea of Cappadocia, the birthday of Saint Basil, bishop, who, in the time of Valens, distinguished in doctrine and wisdom, and grounded in all virtues, shone wonderfully. In the territory of the city of Suessionis, of the holy martyrs Rufinus and Valerius, who, after torments inflicted on them, were ordered by the governor Rictiovarus to be beheaded. On this same day, of Saint Quintianus, presbyter and confessor.

## The seventeenth day before the Kalends · 15 June

[0155]

In Sicily, the birthday of Saints Vitus, Modestus, and Crescentia, who under the emperor Diocletian, after a pot of boiling lead, after beasts and scaffolds overcome by divine power, finished the course of their glorious contest [Bouillart inserts: [nt: Of the mention of Saint Mercurius, which Sollerius asserts was brought in, from the silence of his own codices and an erasure in the Pratensis: from his judgement I appeal to sound eyes. If they suspect even the slightest difference in the script, I plead no case against their judging it written in over the erasure. That it was added is true, but by Usuardus; whence it was taken is not clear. The Acts of that martyr were once in our keeping, since they are recorded in the manuscript catalogue of our codices, n. 461. But I have not been able to find them. Perhaps he to whom they had been lent did not return them; perhaps too they were carried off by theft. As for Alexius, added in the margin, there is no reason why he should pick a quarrel with the Pratensis codex, for there is no Martyrology, at least of those that have been in use, which is not stuffed with additions of this kind. And what wonder? Ought a whole volume to have been copied out every time some saint was added to the Fasti? Bouillart.] In the city of Beneventum, of Saint Mercurius, martyr.] At Mesia, in the city of Dorostorum, of Saint Esichius, soldier, who, seized with blessed Julius, was afterwards crowned with martyrdom under the governor Maximus.



## The sixteenth day before the Kalends · 16 June

[0159]

In the Gauls, at the city of Vesuntio, of the holy martyrs Ferreolus, presbyter, and Ferrutio, deacon, who, sent by blessed Hireneus the bishop to preach the word of God, afterwards, under the judge Claudius, tormented with punishments, are struck with the sword. At Antioch, the birthday of the holy martyrs Cyricus and Julitta his mother, who, after cruel blows and grievous torments, fulfilled the course of their martyrdom by the cutting off of the head. At Lyon, the deposition of blessed Aurelianus, bishop of Arles. In the city of Namnetis, of Saint Similianus, bishop and confessor.

## The fifteenth day before the Kalends · 17 June

[0161]

At Rome, of the two hundred and sixty-two holy martyrs, who were laid on the old Salarian Way at the Clivus Cucumeris. On the same day, of Saint Vulmarus, confessor, a man of admirable holiness and religion. [In Bouillart, [0163] instead of *Eod. die, . . . . . viri*: [nt: In place of Saint Gundulfus the Caroline autograph has: 'On the same day, of Saint Vulmarus, confessor, a man of admirable holiness and religion.' This commemoration, taken from Ado, Usuardus afterwards deleted, and substituted Saint Gundulfus. Both learnedly. For I shall say in its place that Saint Vulmarus departed this life not on this day but on 20 July; and the mention of Saint Gundulfus could not have been made more fittingly than on this day. It is the place which Henschenius himself assigned, who cites the Breviary of Bourges, the tables of the same church, and the purest codices of Usuardus, both those written by hand and those printed. At what time, and of what see, that Saint Gundulfus was bishop has not so far been known. He who wrote the history of the translation and the miracles says that Gundulfus was archbishop of Milan. Venantius Fortunatus, in the Life of Saint Radegundis, calls him bishop of Metz. But neither the Milanese nor the people of Metz number him among their prelates. Nor was it ascertained by Usuardus, who would not have omitted to name the see if it had been known to him. Bouillart.] In the territory of Bourges, of Saint Gundulfus, bishop and confessor.] At Orléans, of Saint Avitus, presbyter and confessor.

## The fourteenth day before the Kalends · 18 June

[0167]

At Rome, on the Ardeatine Way, the birthday of the holy martyrs Mark and Marcellianus, brothers, who, held by the duke Fabianus and bound to a stake, received sharp [nt: In the Saint-Germain manuscript there is an empty space of one word. Bouillart.] [nails] in their feet. And when at last they did not cease to praise Christ, pierced through the sides with a lance, they passed with the glory of martyrdom to the starry kingdoms. In the Spains, in the city of Malaca, of the holy martyrs Siriacus, and Paula, virgin, who, after many torments inflicted on them, overwhelmed with stones, gave back their souls to heaven among the rocks. At Alexandria, the passion of Saint Marina, virgin.

## The thirteenth day before the Kalends · 19 June

[0169]

At Milan, the birthday of the holy martyrs Gervasius and Protasius, brothers, of whom Count Astasius ordered the former to be beaten with leaded scourges so long, until he breathed out his spirit: but the following one, beaten with cudgels, to be cut off by the head. Their sepulchres Saint Ambrose found, the Lord revealing them, and their bodies so incorrupt, as if they had been slain on that same day. At Ravenna, of Saint Ursicinus, martyr, who under the judge Paulinus, after excessive torments, remaining immovable in the confession of the Lord, completed his martyrdom by the cutting off of his head.

## The twelfth day before the Kalends · 20 June

[0173]

At Rome, the deposition of Saint Novatus, brother of Timotheus the presbyter, who were instructed in the faith by the apostles. Their sisters were blessed Potentiana and Praxedes, holy virgins of Christ. In the city of Thomis, of Saints Paul and Ciriacus.

## The eleventh day before the Kalends · 21 June

[0177]

At Sicily, in the city of Syracusa, the birthday of the holy martyrs Rufinus and Martia. In the city of Caesarea of Palestine, of Saint Eusebius, bishop and confessor, a man of most excellent genius and a historiographer. [Bouillart: [nt: Some codices announce Eusebius of Caesarea in one place, others in another, and in different words. Since, then, Sollerius makes no complaint here about the Pratensis, for what cause did he rank it below others much more recent, which set out the commemoration of Eusebius thus: 'In the city of Caesarea of Palestine, of Saint Eusebius, bishop and confessor, a man of most excellent genius and a historiographer'? Yet if you listen to Sollerius, the shorter and simpler the eulogies are, the more they are Usuardus's. But this learned and erudite brevity of the eulogy of Eusebius, preserved in the Pratensis codex, had been falsely enlarged in the others with the title of confessor: and it was a settled thing to disregard the Pratensis whenever it differed from the others. But if his codices announced Eusebius as the Pratensis does, and the Pratensis as his codices do, ah, how Sollerius would have triumphed! with what praises he would have commended the simplicity of Usuardus!] In Cesarea of Palestine, of Saint Eusebius the historiographer.] At Rome, of Saint Demetria, virgin. She, when she was being brought in before the impious Julian for the faith of Christ, gave up her spirit in the confession. In the district *Madriacensis*, of Saint Leutfredus, confessor, who, as a monument of his eminent holiness, is said to have brought forth a spring from the earth by his prayers. In Africa, of Saints Quiriacus and Apollinaris.

## The tenth day before the Kalends · 22 June

[0181]

In Britain, of Saint Albanus, martyr, who in the time of Diocletian, in the city of Verolamium, after blows and bitter torments, was beheaded. There suffered with him also one of the soldiers, because, ordered to strike him, he was unwilling. At Nola of Campania, the birthday of blessed Paulinus, bishop and confessor, of whom Saint Gregory makes mention in the book of Dialogues. He was renowned not only for learning and abundant holiness of life, but also for power against the demons. On this same day, the deposition of Saint Niceae, bishop of the city *Romatiana*.

## The ninth day before the Kalends · 23 June

[0183]

The Vigil of Saint John the Baptist. On the same day, of Saint John, presbyter, whom the impious Julian ordered to be beheaded, unheard, on the old Salarian Way, before the image of the sun. In Tuscia, in the city of Utrina, of Saint Felix, presbyter, whose mouth Turtius the prefect ordered to be pounded with a stone so long, until he gave up the Spirit. In Britain, the birthday of Saint Ediltrudis, virgin, whose body, when it had been buried eleven years, was found incorrupt.

## The eighth day before the Kalends · 24 June

[0187]

The Nativity of blessed John the Baptist and forerunner of the Lord. In the territory of Paris, at the village of Christoilum, the passion of Saints Agoadus and Glibertus, with innumerable others of both sexes. At Augustodunum, the deposition of Simplicius, bishop.

## The seventh day before the Kalends · 25 June

[0189]

At Pirriberoea, of Saint Sosipater, disciple of blessed Paul the apostle. At Alexandria, of Saint Gallicanus, martyr: who, when, raised up with triumphal insignia, he was accepted by Constantine Augustus and dear to him, was converted to the faith through his daughter, Constantia by name, and through the martyrs of Christ John and Paul. The fame of his holy repute afterwards grew so much in the whole world, that people coming from the East and the West saw a man, from patrician and consul, washing the feet of the poor, setting the table, pouring water on hands, ministering carefully to the sick, and performing the other offices of holy service. But he himself afterwards, when he was being compelled to sacrifice under Julian, and scorned it, struck with the sword in the [0191] body, made a martyr of Christ. At Rome, of Saint Lucia, virgin, with twenty-two others. [Bouillart adds: [nt: It is true. To this article the Pratensis subjoins the translation of Saint Eligius. But in what did it sin in this? This translation took place in the middle of the seventh century and was celebrated especially in the churches of Gaul: so that that codex would not have been free of blame had it omitted it; and Sollerius imputes it as a fault that it did not omit it: although seven of the codices which he saw agree with the Pratensis, and eleven of those which he himself (saw). Bouillart.] Also the translation of Saint Eligius, bishop and confessor.]

## The sixth day before the Kalends · 26 June

[0193]

At Rome, the birthday of Saints John and Paul, brothers, of whom the first was chamberlain, the second primicerius, of Constantia the virgin, daughter of Constantine; who afterwards under Julian received the palm of martyrdom, the sword cutting them down. In the district of Poitiers, of Saint Maxentius, presbyter and confessor, glorious in miracles. On the same day, of Saint Perseveranda, virgin. [In Bouillart: At Rome, the birthday of Saints John and Paul, brothers, of whom the first was chamberlain, the second primicerius, of Constancia the virgin, daughter of Constantine; who afterwards under Julian [0195] received the palm of martyrdom, the sword cutting them down. [nt: In Sollerius's edition Vigilius has been moved from this place and put back to the 31st day of January, where Sollerius argues that he was erased, and we confess it. But in this place it will not be beside the point to advise the reader on what other ground the commemoration of Vigilius is suspect to Sollerius. Plainly that long passage pleases him less, which is wholly at odds with the native simplicity of Usuardus, a simplicity which the phrase he had used on 31 January reflects far better: 'At the city of Trent, of Saint Vigilius, bishop and martyr.' Nay, that brevity and simplicity so delights and captivates Sollerius that he would have it be the rule: 'Let our most received rule hold here,' he says, 'namely, that the original purity shines out the more, the briefer and simpler the text is.' But, Sollerius, why on the 21st day of this month did you reject the eulogy of Eusebius, so brief, so simple, and prefer one elaborated and puffed up with false titles? Why on the 25th did you judge the Pratensis eulogy of Saint Gallicanus to be Usuardus's, although it fills almost the whole article? Your Tornacensis codex gave it much more briefly and simply. Why on 18 May did you copy out the whole eulogy of Mark and Marcellianus? How brief, how simple a one the Pulsanensis codex offered you: 'At Rome, the birthday of the holy martyrs Mark and Marcellianus.' The same codex on the 15th simply names Vitus, Modestus and Crescentia; why did you prefer three whole lines? The Tornacensis codex cuts short by almost half the eulogy of blessed Nazarius, martyr, on the 13th. Why did you think the Pratensis and others were to be preferred to it? But why dwell on it at length? I have seen hardly a day in your whole Martyrology on which one eulogy briefer and simpler than another is not brought forward, and on which at the same time you have not departed from your rule. You do not now ask of me that I prove by reasons that Vigilius was erased by Usuardus from the 31st day of January and reserved for this day for just cause. Your own people admit the fact: 'No acts,' they say, 'express the day of his martyrdom: but the church of Trent celebrates the feast of Saint Vigilius on the sixth day before the Kalends of July, probably as his birthday.' Such certainly Florus of Lyon seems to have judged it, when in his additions to the genuine Martyrology of Bede he added the eulogy of Saint Vigilius. Nor did the critic of the Pratensis codex strike only Vigilius out of this article, but Salvius of Angoulême as well, in whose place he judged that Perseveranda should be substituted. On what arguments, pray? On the silence of his codices about Saint Salvius, and their agreement about Perseveranda. I have said already, and not once only, that each of those arguments is of no strength: that it is no wonder that Sollerius's codices agree in mentioning some saint who is lacking in the Pratensis, or that saints whom the Pratensis shows are lacking in them; that this came about because almost all the codices were copied from the first exemplar of Usuardus's Martyrology, and because commemorations were deleted by Usuardus which did not at all satisfy him, or added which he held preferable. So he erased Perseveranda from here because, having read her acts, he noticed that she died not on the sixth but on the seventh day before the Kalends of this month. For so the Acts: 'The deposition of the virgin herself is celebrated on the seventh day before the Kalends of July,' etc. And he put Salvius in her place because the Acts testify that this was the day of his death: 'Saint Salvius and his disciple with him were martyred together under Vuinegardus on the sixth day before the Kalends of July.' But if Sollerius denies that the Acts of Saint Salvius were read by Usuardus, why should he not have imitated Florus and Wandalbert, who both made mention of that prelate on this day? Here I advise Sollerius that his inspector was ill-sighted on this day, who seemed to himself to see an erasure in the Pratensis codex. This whole page is sound, wholly untouched by the point of the knife. But it is one of those few leaves which were substituted in place of those which Usuardus himself tore out: either because for the number of erasures they could not be read, or because the edge of the knife had torn the parchment itself. Why Castellanus wrote that Salvius had been deleted, I suspect the cause was this. On the next leaf after Salvius, though a little higher up, the middle of a line is torn or cut, so that the upper part of the letters is separated from the lower. And lest those letters be lost, a more recent hand indeed, but yet near to those times, wrote above the rent or cut what remained of the eulogy of Saint Marcellus, thus: 'tari viro martyrio coronatus est.' Before it, in the line above, are these words: 'una cum Anastasio mili...' So of the one leaf the most sharp-eyed Castellanus wrote what he had seen on the other; and yet, relying on his testimony, our censor declaims thus against the Pratensis codex: 'But now the celebrated Castellanus, most sharp-eyed in these matters, who consulted the source, has found that that Pratensis codex here again labours under the fault of erased and overwritten, and why not also of substituted, names,' etc. Then he inquires anxiously whence Salvius was sought and brought into our codex, and suspects that it was one of the monks of Saint-Germain who interpolated the sincere and original simplicity of Usuardus with this addition. I will not waste time refuting these trifles, not to say anything harsher. Sollerius will be sorry to have said it, and will wish it held unsaid. (Bouillart.)] At the Trientina city, of Saint Vigilius, bishop, who under the consul Stilicho, for the name of Christ, struck by a great shower of stones, completed his martyrdom. In the district of Poitiers, of Saint Maxentius, presbyter and confessor, glorious in miracles. At the port of Valentianae, of Saint Salvius, bishop of the city of Engolisma.]

## The fifth day before the Kalends · 27 June

[0199]

At Galatia, of blessed Crescens, disciple of Saint Paul the apostle, who, making a passage into the Gauls, converted many to the faith of Christ by the word of preaching. But returning to the nation for which he had been specially given as bishop, he strengthened the Galatians in the work of the Lord until the blessed end of his life. At Tiburtina, a city of Italy, the birthday of Saint Symphorosa with her seven sons, Crescens, Julian, Nemesius, Primitivus, Justinus, Stacteus, Eugenius; of whom the mother, under the emperor Hadrian, on account of her insuperable constancy, first beaten with palms, then hung up by the hair, last of all, a stone tied to her, was cast headlong into a river. But the sons, stretched on stakes to pulleys, completed their martyrdom by divers manners of death. At Cordoba, of Saint Zoilus, martyr, whose body, when it had long lain hidden where it had been buried, was made manifest by divine revelation to the venerable bishop of the same place, Agapius by name.

## The fourth day before the Kalends · 28 June

[0203]

The Vigil of the apostles Peter and Paul, and the birthday of blessed Leo, pontiff and doctor. At Lyon of Gaul, of Saint Hireneus, bishop and martyr, who, it is agreed, was the disciple of blessed Policarpus, priest and martyr, as Jerome writes, near to the times of the apostles. But afterwards, in the persecution of Severus, with almost all the people of his city, he was crowned with a glorious martyrdom. At Alexandria, of the holy martyrs Plutarchus, Serenus, Heraclides, Heros, Potamiena, Marcella, with three others, among whom Potamiena the virgin shone forth especially, who first sweating through immense and innumerable contests for her virginity, then also, having suffered exquisite and unheard-of torments for martyrdom, at the last was consumed by fire.

## The third day before the Kalends · 29 June

[0207]

At Rome, the birthday of the blessed apostles Peter and Paul, who suffered under Nero Caesar, in the consulship of Bassus and Tuscus. Of whom the former is celebrated in the same city beside the Triumphal Way with the veneration of the whole world; the following one also, buried on the Ostian Way, is held in equal honour. On the same day, of Saint Marcellus, martyr, who at the fort of Argentomacum, for the faith of Christ, together with Anastasius, a soldier, was beheaded [Bouillart: with Anastasius, a military man, was crowned with martyrdom]. In the territory *Senonicus*, of Beata, virgin.

## The day before the Kalends · 30 June

[0209]

The commemoration of Saint Paul the apostle, whom, slain with the sword, heaven received together with blessed Peter hung on the cross [Bouillart adds: [nt: These words, 'Not however ... writes', were passed over by Sollerius in his edition of Usuardus; yet they are truly Usuardus's, and in the autograph they are written cleanly, simply and in the first hand, with no trace of erasure, no difference of ink, the same form of letters. The Dervensis codex gives the same testimony of Arator, so that there is no doubt that it was written by Usuardus. Whatever Sollerius chatters on this place, that Usuardus adhered to the opinion of Ado; that like the one, so the other dreamed that both apostles underwent martyrdom not when the time of a year had rolled round, but on one and the same day, in the sixteenth of Nero; that the opinion of Arator was intruded by some more recent smatterer: all these are words, and nothing more. Here I do not ask whether Usuardus ought to have followed Ado or Arator as his guide. On Ado's side are Dionysius of Corinth, Bucherius's Kalendar, Epiphanius, Jerome, Asterius and the Lateran council under Gelasius: before Arator, Prudentius, Augustine, and Nilus in Photius had been of the same opinion. But if it is true, as the Lateran council affirms, that this latter opinion proceeded from heretics, I do not know with what mind Sollerius could say that this is Ado's dream, unless perhaps that dream came to Ado through the gate of horn, by which exit is given to true shades.] Not however on the same day, but when the time of a year had rolled round, as the eloquent man Arator writes]. At Rome, the birthday [Bouillart omits *natalis*] of most blessed Lucina, disciple of the apostles. In the city of Lemovicae, of Saint Marcialis, bishop, with two presbyters, Alpinianus and Stratoclinianus [Bouillart: *Stratocliano*], whose life shone forth exceedingly with the signs of miracles. On this same day, of Saints Corsicus, presbyter, and Leo, subdeacon. In the territory *Vivariensis*, of Saint Ostianus, presbyter and confessor.

## JULY HAS 31 DAYS.

[0213]

## On the Kalends · 1 July

[0213]

On Mount Or, the deposition of Aaron, the first priest. In the territory of Lyon, the deposition of blessed Domitianus, abbot, who among the first there practised the hermit's life, and, gathering very many to himself in the service of God, and very renowned for great virtues and glorious miracles, was gathered to his fathers in a good old age. In the city of Engolisma, of Saint Eparchius, monk and confessor. In the monastery of Aninsula, of Saint Carilefus, presbyter. In the territory of Reims, of Saint Theodoricus, presbyter. At the port of Valencianae, of Saint Salvi, confessor. [In Bouillart: In the city of Engolisma, of Saint Eparchius, confessor. [nt: Of the last three commemorations the Caroline autograph has thus: *In the monastery of Aninsula, of Saint Carilefus, presbyter. Also in the territory of Reims, of Saint Theodoricus, presbyter. At the port of Valentianae, of Saint Salvius, confessor.* In his own codex Usuardus, for *in the monastery of Aninsula*, wrote *in the district Cinomannicus*. This correction occurs not in this place only but in many others too. It is likely that the cause was this: that to most people certain particular places are much less known than the regions in which they are situated. So that those who were to have the martyrology in use might the more easily perceive with whom they shared a common veneration of some saint, he designated the regions where the saints' cult was celebrated rather than the places. Perhaps too a second cause was added to this one, namely to vary the phrasing. He had already written *in the territory of Lyon* for the particular place where Saint Domicianus had died and was venerated: afterwards he wrote *in the district Cinomannicus*, so as to denote in the same manner, yet with another word, the place where Saint Carilefus was known. And so the word *territorium*, which he had to use in the third commemoration, brings less tedium. I add that corrections of this kind do not come into an interpolator's mind. Such men are indeed wont to add, take away, transpose; but what is gained by deleting the name of a particular place so that the more general name of a region may be shown? Of Saint Theodoricus there is nothing for which I need labour in defending the correction. Whether he called him presbyter in the Caroline autograph and granted him the title of confessor in his own codex is all one, and there is no leisure for divining in trifles of this kind. How learnedly Salvius was erased from here is plain from what we observed at 26 June. Lastly, that Saint Leonorius was fittingly commemorated here is a matter placed beyond controversy. This is the Leonorius who, brought up from a boy and instructed in the first elements of the Christian religion by Saint Hildutus, was afterwards made a bishop without a see, so that he might carry the name of Christ wherever he would the more freely. He was celebrated in the sixth century of the Church, in the reign of Childebert in Gaul, to whom he was most acceptable. More is told of him by Ussher in his Antiquities of the British Churches and by Le Cointe in the Ecclesiastical Annals of the Franks, which it is not the purpose of the present work to relate here.] In the district *Cinomannicus*, of Saint Carilefus, presbyter. Also in the territory of Reims, of Saint Theodoricus, confessor. In Britain, of Saint Leonorius, confessor and bishop.]



## The sixth day before the Nones · 2 July

[0219]

At Rome, on the Aurelian Way, the birthday of Saints Processus and Martinianus, who were baptized by blessed Peter the apostle, but under Nero, having endured the bruising of the mouth, the rack, sinews, cudgels, flames and scorpions, at the last cut down with the sword, are crowned with martyrdom. On this same day, of the three holy soldiers who suffered with blessed Paul the apostle. Also, of the holy martyrs Aristo, Crescentianus, Euticianus, Urbanus, Vitalis, Justus, Felicissimus, Felix, Martia and Symphorosa, who were all crowned with glorious martyrdom in Campania. At Tours, the deposition of Saint Monegundis, a religious [Bouillart: [nt: This reading of the Pratensis codex, *of Saint Monegundis, consecrated to God*, Sollerius confesses to be *the best*. But because the Heriniensis and Tornacensis codices read *religiosam* ('a religious'), he feared lest he should seem to have preferred the Pratensis even in things of no account.] *Deo sacratae*].

## The fifth day before the Nones · 3 July

[0221]

At Edessa of Mesopotamia, the translation of the body of Saint Thomas the apostle. On this same day, at Cneocaesarea of Pontus, the birthday of blessed Gregory, bishop and martyr, who, endowed with the great glory of signs and miracles, among other things on a certain occasion, so that there might be room enough for building a church, moved a mountain by his prayers. In the city *Clusina*, of the holy martyrs Hireneus, deacon, and Mustiola, a noble matron, who suffered under the emperor Aurelian. In Laodicea of Syria, of Saint Anatholius, bishop, who left behind writings to be admired not only by religious men but also by philosophers. At Alexandria, of Saint Triphon and ten others. Also at Constantinople, of Saint Eulogius.

## The fourth day before the Nones · 4 July

[0225]

Of Oseas the prophet. At Tours, the translation of blessed Martin, bishop and confessor, and the ordination of his episcopate. In Africa, the birthday of Saint Jocundianus, martyr, plunged into the sea. At Sirmium, of the holy martyrs Innocentius and Sebastia, with thirty others. In the territory of the city of Bourges, of Saint Laurianus, martyr, whose head was carried to Seville, to the Spains.

## The third day before the Nones · 5 July

[0227]

At Syria, the birthday of Saint Domitius, martyr, who by his virtues bestows many benefits on the inhabitants. At Rome, of Saint Zoa, martyr, who, while she was praying at the Confession of Peter the apostle, was seized by the persecutors and thrust into a most dark prison, then hung upon a tree by the neck and by the hair, a horrible smoke being applied beneath, and gave up the spirit in the confession of the Lord.

## The day before the Nones · 6 July

[0229]

At Judaea, of Isaias the prophet, who, cut into two parts, fell, and was buried under the oak Rogel, beside the crossing of the waters. Also the Octave of the apostles, and the first entry of blessed Paul the apostle into the city of Rome, in the second year of the reign of Nero. At Rome, the birthday of Saint Tranquillinus, martyr, who, while he was praying at the Confession of blessed Paul, was seized by the pagans and stoned, and consummated his martyrdom. In the district of Trier, of Saint Goar, presbyter and confessor.

## On the Nones · 7 July

[0233]

At Alexandria, the birthday of Saint Pantenus, an apostolic man and adorned with all wisdom, whose zeal and love towards the word of God was so great that he even set out, with the warmth of faith and devotion, to preach the Gospel of Christ to all the nations which are hidden away in the farthest recesses of the East. At Rome, of the holy martyrs Nicostratus, Claudius, Castorius, Victorinus and Simphronianus, whom Fabianus the judge, dealing with them for ten days by threats and blandishments, when he could not move them in anything at all, ordered to be tortured a third time, and afterwards to be cast headlong into the sea. [Bouillart adds, from the margin of the *Pratensis* codex: On the same day, the Octave of Saint Marcialis, bishop and confessor.]

## The eighth day before the Ides · 8 July

[0237]

At Asia Minor, of Saints Aquila and Priscilla his wife, of whom it is written in the Acts of the Apostles. In Palestine, the birthday of blessed Procopius, martyr, who, brought from Scitopolis to Caesarea, at the first boldness of his answers was beheaded by the judge Fabianus. On the same day, [nt: The Caroline autograph joins companions to Saint Cilianus. Yet there is no erasure here in the Pratensis: because it is another leaf, and I have never failed to observe that there no erasure is seen and yet the codex differs from the Caroline autograph. Bouillart.] of Saint Cilianus, martyr.

## The seventh day before the Ides · 9 July

[0239]

At Rome, at the Gutta that flows continually, the birthday of Saint Zeno, martyr, and of ten thousand two hundred and three others. On the same day, of blessed Cirillus, bishop, who, cast into the flames, when he had come out unharmed and had been released by the judge in amazement at so great a miracle, was again, for the urgent and eager preaching he had made of Christ, beheaded by the same man. In the city of Tyre, the passion of Saints Anatholia and Audax under the emperor Decius; of whom Anatholia, the virgin of Christ, harassed with various kinds of blows, was at the last run through with the sword while at prayer. Audax also was given into custody; and without delay he is crowned by capital sentence. In the city of Martula, of Saint Brictius, bishop and confessor, who, after he had suffered many things for the confession of the Lord, and had been strengthened by a holy angel and by blessed Peter the Apostle, gaining likewise great multitudes of believing peoples for almighty God, rested in peace.

## The sixth day before the Ides · 10 July

[0243]

At Rome, of the seven brothers, sons of Saint Felicitas, that is, Januarius, Felix, Philip, Silvanus, Alexander, Vitalis and Martialis. Of whom Januarius, in the time of Antoninus, after beatings with rods and prison, was killed under the leaded scourges. Felix and Philip were slain with cudgels. Silvanus was killed by being thrown down from a height. Alexander, Vitalis and Martialis were punished by capital sentence. In Africa, the birthday of Saints Januarius, Marinus, Nabor and Felix, beheaded. Also at Rome, of the holy virgins Rufina and Secunda, who, subdued by torments under the persecution of Valerian and Gallienus, at the last departed, the one with her head struck by the sword, the other with her neck cut.

## The fifth day before the Ides · 11 July

[0247]

The translation of Saint Benedict, abbot. At Armenia Minor, in the city of Nicopolis, the birthday of the holy martyrs Januarius and Pelagia, who, tortured for four days with the rack, with hooks and with fragments of potsherds, fulfilled their martyrdom [Bouillart inserts: [nt: Since the love of truth alone drove me to undertake this work, such as it is, I am far from wishing to hide the truth or even to disguise it, even when it is inconvenient to me. So I freely confess that this article is disfigured by an erasure from the word 'cruciati' to the end; and that the script which now occupies the space of the erasure is of another hand, though contemporary with Usuardus. Not on that account, however, would I dare to affirm, as Sollerius does, that Martiana was intruded. I leave the matter open; the reader, if he wishes, will settle it by the authority of the three codices Antuerp.-Maj., Rosweyd., Aquicinct., which Sollerius testifies followed the Pratensis, and of the three of the Prés B, D, E, the Conchens. and the Montisburg., which give the same reading. Bouillart.] In Mauritania Caesariensis, of Saint Martiana, virgin and martyr]. In the territory *Senonicum*, of blessed Sidronius, martyr. Also in the territory of Poitiers, of Saint Sabinus, confessor.

## The fourth day before the Ides · 12 July

[0249]

At Cyprus, of blessed Nason, an old disciple of Christ. In Aquileia, the birthday of Saint Hermagoras, bishop, disciple of blessed Mark the evangelist, who, amid miracles of healing and earnestness of preaching and the conversion of peoples, having experienced very many kinds of punishments, at the last, with Fortunatus his archdeacon, merited by capital punishment an everlasting triumph. In Caesarea, of Saint Dius [nt: Saint Dius was added here by Usuardus after the first copy of his Martyrology had been offered to King Charles. Of that saint there is nothing in the Dervensis codex. The Hieronymian lists and Ado record him. Bouillart.].

## The third day before the Ides · 13 July

[0253]

Of Joel and Esdras the prophets. At Macedonia, the birthday of blessed Silas the apostle; who, being one of the first brethren, and appointed by the apostles to the churches of the Gentiles, earnestly consummated the office of preaching, full of the grace of the Lord, and, glorifying Christ in his sufferings, afterwards rested. In Africa, of the holy confessors Eugenius, bishop of Carthage, glorious in faith and virtues, and of all the clergy of the same Church, who, wasted by slaughter and hunger, about five hundred or more, among whom were very many readers who were little children, rejoicing in the Lord, were driven far off into cruel exile. And there were among them men most noble, an archdeacon named Salutaris, and Muritta, second in the office of the ministers, who, made confessors a third time, were made illustrious by the title of glorious perseverance in Christ. In Lesser Britain, of Saint Turianus, bishop and confessor, a man of wonderful simplicity and innocence.

## The day before the Ides · 14 July

[0257]

At Pontus, the birthday of blessed Focas, bishop of the city of Sinope, who under the emperor Trajan overcame prison, chains, iron, and fire also, for Christ. At Alexandria, of Saint Heracleae, prelate, to whom, on account of his most celebrated repute, Africanus the historiographer records that he hastened.

## On the Ides · 15 July

[0261]

At Nisibis, the birthday of Saint James, bishop, a man of great virtue. He was one of the number of the confessors under the persecution of Maximinus, and of those who in the synod of Nicaea condemned the perversity of Arius by the opposition of the *Omousion*. At Rome, at the Port, the birthday of Saints Eutropius, Zosima and Bonosa, sisters. At Carthage, of the holy martyrs Catulinus, deacon, Januarius, Florentius, Julia and Justa, who are laid in the Basilica of Faustus. At Alexandria, of Saints Philip, Zeno, Narseus and ten children.

## The seventeenth day before the Kalends · 16 July

[0263]

At Antioch of Syria, the birthday of blessed Eustachius, bishop and confessor, under the emperor Constantine, who, for the catholic faith driven into exile to Trajanopolis, a city of Thrace, rested there. In Ostia, the passion of Saint Hilary, monk, who, when he would not sacrifice under the persecution of Julian, beaten with cudgels, took up martyrdom.

## The sixteenth day before the Kalends · 17 July

[0267]

In Carthage, the birthday of the holy Scillitan martyrs, that is, Speratus, Natalis, Cithinus, Berturius, Felix, Aquilinus, Letatius, Januaria, Generosa, Bessia, Donata and Secundina, under the prefect Saturninus, who, after their first confession sent into prison and fastened in the wood, were then beheaded with the sword.

## The fifteenth day before the Kalends · 18 July

[0271]

At Carthage, of Saint Guddenes, martyr, who, by order of the proconsul Rufinus, for the confession of Christ, was four times, at different seasons, harassed by stretching on the rack, and tortured by the horrible tearing of the hooks, afflicted also for a very long time by the filth of prison, and at the last was cut down with the sword. In the city of Dorostorum, of Saint Emilianus. [Bouillart adds, in cursive type: In the district *Castrensis*, the deposition of Saint Arnulfus, martyr and bishop.]

## The fourteenth day before the Kalends · 19 July

[0275]

The birthday of Saint Epafras, who, ordained bishop at Colossae by blessed Paul, renowned for virtues, received there the palm of martyrdom for the sheep entrusted to him, in a manly contest. At the Thebaid, of our holy father Arsenius, of whom it is related in the Words of the Elders that, on account of the overflowing of his tears which had to be wiped, he always had a cloth in his bosom or in his hand. In Spain, in the city of Seville, the passion of the holy Justa and Rufina, who, seized by the governor Diogenianus, were first harassed by stretching on the rack and by the tearing of the hooks, afterwards afflicted with prison, hunger and pains; at length Justa breathed out her spirit in prison, and the neck of Rufina was broken in the confession.



## The thirteenth day before the Kalends · 20 July

[0277]

The birthday of blessed Joseph, who was surnamed Justus. He, serving in the office of preaching and holiness, and sustaining much persecution from the Jews for the faith of Christ, rested in Judaea by a most victorious end. Of whom it is related that he drank poison and suffered nothing harmful from it, on account of his faith in the Lord. At Damascus, of Saints Sabinus, Maximus, Julian, Macrobius, Cassius and Paula, with ten others. In the city of Cordoba, of Saint Paul, deacon and martyr. [Bouillart: . . . . . with ten others. [nt: After the martyrs of Damascus the Caroline autograph has thus: *In the city of Cordoba, of Saint Paul, deacon and martyr. On this same day, of Saint Margaret, virgin.* Neither of those commemorations was ever made in writing by Usuardus. Only one line has been scraped with the knife; and that space could never have held Paul and Margaret. Why, then, do all the codices except the Pratensis commemorate both? Perhaps Usuardus dictated Margaret from memory: perhaps too she was added a little after Usuardus. A knot that cannot be untied, until the very codex which was offered to King Charles comes forth from some library. As for Saint Paul, it is hard to say why Usuardus deleted him: for saints from Spain seem to have been dear to him, and here Paul would have occupied his own place, since, on the testimony of Dom Eulogius, martyr, he died on the thirteenth day before the Kalends of August, on the second feria, in the year 851. As far as I can reach by conjecture, when two saints fell on the same day, of whom one was of a distant region and the other a neighbour, Usuardus put the latter before the other. You have the Life of Saint Vulmarus in part I of the third Benedictine century, p. 234.] In the district *Bononiensis*, of Saint Vulmarus, confessor. *And in the margin:* On the same day, of Saint Margaret, virgin and martyr.]

## The twelfth day before the Kalends · 21 July

[0281]

Of Daniel the prophet. At Rome, of Saint Praxedes, virgin. She, instructed in all chastity and in the divine law, giving herself constantly to vigils and prayers and fasts, rested in Christ, and was buried beside her sister Potentiana on the Salarian Way. In the Gauls, in the city of Marseille, the birthday of Saint Victor, who, since he was a soldier and would neither serve as a soldier nor sacrifice to idols, was first thrust into prison, and there visited by angels, then tortured with various punishments, and at the last crushed in a baker's mill, consummated his martyrdom. There suffered with him three soldiers, Alexander, Felicianus and Longinus. At Troyes, of Saint Julia, virgin and martyr.

## The eleventh day before the Kalends · 22 July

[0285]

At Ancyra of Galatia, the birthday of Saint Plato, martyr, whose acts are extant. On the same day, of Saint Mary Magdalene, and of blessed Sintice, who sleeps buried at Philippi: of whom the apostle Paul writes. In the monastery *Fontinella* [Bouillart: In the district of Rouen], the deposition of Saint Wandregisilus, confessor. In the territory *Arvernensis*, of Saint Meneleus, abbot.

## The tenth day before the Kalends · 23 July

[0289]

The birthday of blessed Apollinaris, bishop, who, ordained at Rome by the apostle Peter and sent to Ravenna, afterwards suffered for the faith of Christ diverse and manifold beatings. And at length under Vespasian Caesar, amid the very torments succeeding one another by turns, he consummated a glorious martyrdom.

## The ninth day before the Kalends · 24 July

[0291]

At Rome, on the Tiburtine Way, the birthday of Saint Vincent. At Emerita, a city of Spain, of Saint Victor, a soldier, who with his two brothers Stercatius and Antinogenus, tried by diverse tortures, consummated his martyrdom. In Italy, in the city of Tyre, of Saint Christina, virgin, who, believing in Christ, first under two judges bearing torments steadfastly, at the last through their successor, by the cutting out of her tongue and the piercing of arrows, completed the course of her martyrdom. On the same day, the birthday of Saints Niceta and Aquilina, who, converted to Christ by the preaching of blessed Christopher the martyr, took up the palm of martyrdom by the cutting off of the head. In the city *Amiternina*, of eighty-three soldiers. [Bouillard adds in the margin: At Senones, of the holy prelates Ursicinus and Pavacius.]

## The eighth day before the Kalends · 25 July

[0295]

The birthday of blessed James the apostle, brother of John the evangelist, who was beheaded by king Herod. His most sacred bones, translated from Jerusalem to the Spains and laid in their farthest borders, are honoured with the most celebrated veneration of those peoples. In Lycia, in the city of Samon, of Saint Christopher, who, worn down with iron rods, and saved by the power of Christ from the flames of a raging fire, at the last pierced through with the strokes of arrows, completed his martyrdom by the cutting off of his head. In the city of Barcelona, the birthday of blessed Cucufas, martyr, who, having experienced under three judges the most atrocious kinds of torments for the name of the Lord, at the last passed away a victor by the sword. In the city of Paris, the translation of Saint Germanus, bishop and confessor.

## The seventh day before the Kalends · 26 July

[0297]

The birthday of Saint Herastus, who, left as bishop at Philippi by blessed Paul, having been crowned there with martyrdom, rested. At Rome, at the Port, of Saint Jacinctus, martyr, who, first thrown into the fire, then cast headlong into a most violent torrent, came out unharmed: after this, struck with the sword by the consular Leontius, he ended his life. On the Latin Way, of Saints Simpronius, Olimpius, Theodolus and Exuperia, who, burned up with fires, as is read in the acts of Saint Stephen the pope, obtained the palm of martyrdom. [Bouillart adds, in cursive type: The translation of Saint Marcellus, bishop and confessor.]

## The sixth day before the Kalends · 27 July

[0301]

At Ephesus, the birthday of Saints Maximianus, Malchus, Martianus and four others, whose acts are extant. At Nicomedia, of the blessed martyrs Hermolaus, presbyter, Hernempus and Hermogratis, brothers, who, after many punishments inflicted on them by the emperor Maximian, were punished by capital sentence for the confession of Christ. On the same day in Sicily, of blessed Simeon, monk. At Auxerre, the deposition of Etherius, bishop.

## The fifth day before the Kalends · 28 July

[0305]

At Nicomedia, the passion of blessed Pantaleon, who, seized for the faith of Christ by Maximian, tortured by the punishment of the rack and by the burning of torches, but refreshed amid these things by the Lord appearing to him, at length consummated his martyrdom by the stroke of the sword. [Bouillart adds in the margin: On the same day, the passion of the holy martyrs Nazarius and Celsus the boy.] In Lesser Britain, in the monastery of Dolum, of Saint Samson, bishop and confessor. On the same day at Lyon, of Saint Peregrinus, presbyter, whose blessedness the glory of miracles attests [nt: By what chance Simplicius, Faustinus and Beatrix crept into this article in the Dervensis codex I do not know; the Pratensis codex records them in the following article. For in the latter there is no erasure here, nor another leaf. Nor would they have been well placed here. For so the Acts in Mombritius: *Then blessed Beatrix, together with the blessed presbyters Crispus and John and other Christians, raised the bodies of the holy martyrs Simplicius and Faustinus from the river* (the Tiber, into which they had been cast headlong under the emperors Diocletian and Maximian), *and buried them there in the sixth of Philip, on the fourth day before the Kalends of August.* See also Aringhi in Roma subterranea, book II, ch. 20, pp. 365 and 366. If the Acts of those saints edited by Mombritius could command belief, it would be easy to determine in what year they won the glory of martyrdom. For those Acts relate that Saint Beatrix, after she had paid the last office to her brothers on the fourth day before the Kalends of August, came to a certain venerable matron named Lucina and stayed with her for seven months; that she was thrust into prison by a certain Lucretius, stifled by night in the prison by the slaves of that abandoned man, and buried by Lucina in the sixth of Philip, on the fourth day before the Kalends of August. Beatrix therefore departed this life a year after her brothers. In the same year, as it seems, Lucina, when she was fleeing in terror of the harshness of the punishments, was admonished by Beatrix not to go away, since in this month peace would be given to the churches of Christ; and this month was August. But the death of Maximinus, which happened in the month of August of the year 312 or 313, gave peace back to the churches. Simplicius and Faustinus therefore suffered in the year 311 or 312, and Beatrix in the year 312 or 313. Tillemont, tom. V, p. 560, suspects that that prophecy of Beatrix is to be understood of the year 305, in which Diocletian gave up the empire. But can that be called peace which followed that abdication? Next, Diocletian abdicated in the month of May, and I have seen nothing in the Acts to signify that Lucina was admonished in the month of May. Nor do I think that these first words of the Acts stand at all in the way of this conjecture: *In the times of Diocletian and Maximian*, etc. For this loose way of assigning the time can as easily be explained of the life of both or of either as of their reign: and if the Acts erred in this alone, I have no doubt that they would be approved by all. Bouillart.].

## The fourth day before the Kalends · 29 July

[0309]

At Rome, on the Aurelian Way, the birthday of blessed Felix, pope, who, cast down from his see by Constantius Augustus for the defence of the catholic faith and slain with the sword, fell most gloriously. Also on the Portuensian Way, of the holy martyrs Simplicius, Faustinus and Beatrix, in the times of Diocletian, of whom the two, after many and diverse tortures, were ordered to undergo capital sentence. But Beatrix, their sister, was stifled in prison in the confession of Christ. [nt: Apart from these words, 'in the city of Troyes', the whole commemoration of Saint Lupus has been written over an erasure; yet of that erasure there is no sign, no trace, either in the Dervensis or in Sollerius's codices. Which fact frees the Pratensis codex from all suspicion of interpolation. For not even Sollerius would deny that it follows from this that that erasure is older than any other copy, and so was made by the author himself. If, then, the other corrections were written in the same hand as this one, it will be certain that all the corrections were written by the author himself. Whether they are all of the same hand, let the eyes be the judge. Bouillart.] In the city of Troyes, of Saint Lupus, confessor, who, sent into Britain with blessed Germanus, came there. He discharged the priesthood venerably for fifty-two years.

## The third day before the Kalends · 30 July

[0313]

At Rome, the birthday of Saints Abdon and Sennes, under-kings, who, when in Cordula, a city of the Persians, they were suffering chains from Decius, at the last he brought them to Rome bound with chains and wasted by diverse punishments, where they were first beaten with leaded scourges, and then slain with the sword. At Africa, in the city of Lucernaria, of the holy virgins Maxima, Donatilla and Secunda, who, in the persecution of Gallienus, first given vinegar and gall to drink, then beaten with most bitter blows, and tortured by stretching on the rack, afterwards also burned on gridirons, and moreover thrown to the beasts, but untouched by them, at the last had their throats cut with the sword.

## The day before the Kalends · 31 July

[0315]

At Caesarea, the passion of Fabius, martyr, who, since he refused to bear the governor's standards, was first thrust into prison for some days, then, questioned once and again, he persists in the confession of Christ: and forthwith he is condemned by the judge by capital sentence. At Ravenna, the passing of Saint Germanus, bishop of Auxerre, most renowned in birth, faith and doctrine, and in the glory of miracles. In the city of Sinnada, of Saints Democritus, Secundus and Dionisius.

## AUGUST HAS 31 DAYS.

[0319]

## On the Kalends · 1 August

At Antioch, the birthday of the holy Maccabees. At Rome, at Saint Peter at the Chains. At Italy, in the city of Vercelli, of blessed Eusebius, bishop, who, for the confession of the faith banished by Constantius to Scitopolis, and thence to Cappadocia, afterwards returned to his church, and at the last, the Arians persecuting him, suffered martyrdom. Also at Rome, the passion of the holy virgins Spes, Fides and Charitas, and of their mother Sapientia: who under the emperor Hadrian obtained the crown of martyrdom. On the Latin Way, of the holy martyrs Bonus, presbyter, Faustus and Maurus, with seven others, who are described in the Acts of Stephen the pope. In the Spains, in the city of Gerona, the birthday of Saint Felix, whom the judge Dacianus, after inflicting kinds of torments, ordered to be scraped with hooks, and then to be torn to the bones, and wounds to be renewed upon wounds so long, until he gave back to Christ his unconquered spirit. At Arabia, in the city of Philadelphia, of the holy martyrs Cirillus, Aquila, Peter, Domicianus, Rufus and Menander, crowned on one day. In the territory of Paris, of Justinus, martyr. In the district *Lisuinus*, of Saint Nemesius, confessor.

## The fourth day before the Nones · 2 August

At Rome, in the cemetery of Calixtus, the birthday of blessed Stephen, pope, who, in the persecution of Valerian, when he was being pursued for the martyrdom of Christ, and was standing undaunted before the solemnities of the altar and continuing steadily with what he had begun, is beheaded in that same place, as it were in his own see. In the province of Bithynia, in the city of Nicaea, of Saint Theodota with her three sons, of whom the consular of Bithynia had the first-born, named Evodius, confessing Christ confidently, first beaten with cudgels, then herself with all her sons consumed by fire.

## The third day before the Nones · 3 August

At Jerusalem, the finding of the body of the most blessed Stephen the protomartyr, and of Saints Gamaliel, Nicomedi and Abibon. This, revealed in the seventh year of the emperor Honorius, and written up by the blessed presbyter Lucian, is made known, in the person of the whole Church, to almost all nations. At Constantinople, of Hermellus, martyr.

## The day before the Nones · 4 August

[0329]

The birthday of blessed Aristarchus, disciple of Saint Paul the apostle. At Rome, on the Latin Way, the passion of Saint Tertullinus, martyr, who, under the emperor Aurelian, after the impious slaughter of cudgels, and the burning of fires about his sides, and the battering of his mouth, and the stretching of the rack, and the cutting of the sinews, sentence being given, consummated his martyrdom by the cutting off of his head.

## On the Nones · 5 August

[0333A]

At the province of Raetia, in the city *Augustana*, the birthday of Saint Afra, who, being a pagan and a harlot, converted to Christ through the teaching of Saint Narcissus, bishop, and baptized with all her house, was given over to the fire for the confession of the Lord. On the same day, of Saint Oswald, king of the English, whose Acts the Venerable Bede, presbyter, records in the history of that same people. At Augustudunum, of blessed Cassianus, bishop and confessor. At Catalauni, of Saint Memmius, bishop.



## The eighth day before the Ides · 6 August

[0335]

[On Mount Tabor, the transfiguration of the Lord Jesus, *Bouillart in the margin.*] At Rome, on the Appian Way, the birthday of blessed Xystus, bishop and martyr. And in the cemetery of Praetextatus, of Saints Felicissimus and Agapitus, his deacons, who were beheaded together with him under Decius. There were beheaded with him also four others, that is, Januarius, Magnus, Vincent and Stephen, subdeacons, as is read in the pontifical acts. There suffered with them blessed Quartus, as Saint Cyprian writes. In the Spains, in the city of Complutum, of Justus and Pastor, brothers, who, while they were still [0337] boys being instructed in letters, threw away their tablets in the school and ran of their own accord to martyrdom. And forthwith ordered by Dacianus to be seized, when they strengthened one another most steadfastly with mutual exhortations, they were led out beyond the city, and had their throats cut by the executioners.

## The seventh day before the Ides · 7 August

[0339]

At Tuscia, in the city of Aretium, the birthday of blessed Donatus, bishop and martyr, under the emperor Julian. Who, as Gregory the pope records in the books of the Dialogues, restored, by lingering at mass, the holy chalice broken by the pagans. At Rome, of the holy martyrs Peter and Julian, with eighteen others. At Milan, of Saint Faustinus, martyred in the time of Aurelius Commodus

## The sixth day before the Ides · 8 August

[0343]

At Rome, on the Ostian Way, the birthday of blessed Ciriacus, deacon, and of the holy martyrs Largus and Smaragdus, with twenty others, in the time of the emperor Diocletian. [nt: The place where the commemoration of Saint Severus is now read was once erased. Likewise the following article is torn with the knife from head to foot, Sollerius saying nothing and admitting the correction. Which saints, pray, were once recorded in these places? Where have they gone, Reverend Father, those old codices of yours, from which you think the original and native simplicity of Usuardus is to be drawn? Bring them forward, display them, as you are wont. Is there no fraud and imposture lurking here? Was there not *some fellow initiate (symmistes) of Usuardus, who thought his own style must be tempered to Usuardus's?* But, jest aside, confess at last that erasures and emendations do no harm whatever to the purity of Usuardus's text, since the same hand that copied out the whole codex corrected it.] At Vienne, a city of Gaul, of Saint Severus, presbyter and confessor, who, as his acts testify, for the sake of preaching the Gospel undertook a laborious pilgrimage, and, coming to the aforesaid city, converted a huge multitude of pagans to the faith of Christ by word and miracles.

## The fifth day before the Ides · 9 August

[0345]

The vigil of Saint Laurence, martyr. At Colonia of Tuscia, the birthday of Saints Secundianus, Marcellianus and Verianus, who, in the time of Decius, under the consular Promotus, were first beaten, then hung upon the rack, and scraped with hooks, and roasted with fire applied to their sides, and, beheaded, merited the triumphal palm of martyrdom. At Rome, of Saint Romanus, a soldier, who, pricked to the heart by the confession of blessed Laurence, asked to be baptized by him, and forthwith, at the command of Decius, was brought forth with cudgels and beheaded.

## The fourth day before the Ides · 10 August

[0349]

At Rome, on the Tiburtine Way, the birthday of blessed Laurence, archdeacon, who, in the presence of the emperor Decius, after very many torments of prison, of diverse scourgings, of burning plates, at the last roasted on an iron gridiron, completed his martyrdom. On the same day at Rome, of one hundred and sixty-five soldiers.

## The third day before the Ides · 11 August

[0351]

At Rome, between the Two Laurels, the birthday of Saint Tiburtius, who, under the judge Fabianus, when he had walked with bare soles over burning coals and was confessing Christ with the greater constancy, is ordered to be led to the third milestone from the city and there to be put to the sword. Also at Rome, of Saint Susanna, virgin, who, since she was sprung of noble lineage and was the niece of blessed Gaius the pontiff, merited the palm of martyrdom in the time of Diocletian, by the cutting off of her head. In the city of Camberacum, of Saint Gaugericus, bishop and confessor. At the fort *Ebroas*, of Saint Taurinus, bishop.

## The day before the Ides · 12 August

[0353]

In Sicily, in the city of Cathina, the birthday of Saint Euplus, deacon, under Diocletian and Maximian Augusti, who, when he had been tortured a very long time for the confession of the Lord, at length received the palm of martyrdom by the sword striking. At the city *Augustana*, of Saint Hilaria, mother of Saint Afra the martyr, who, while she was keeping watch at her tomb, [0355] was given over to the fire there by the persecutors for the faith of Christ, with Digna and Eumenia and Euprepia. There suffered also on the same day in the aforesaid city Quiriacus [Bouillart: [nt: In place of *on the same day there suffered at Rome under the prefect Pertinax*, which Usuardus added in his own codex, the Caroline autograph had thus: *There suffered also on the same day in the aforesaid city.* No one with sound eyes would doubt that the correction was made by Usuardus. But whence he learned that those martyrs suffered on the same day, that Pertinax was then prefect of the City; that Nimmia and Juliana and twenty other companions are to be joined to Quiriacus, Largio and Crescentianus; and lastly that all those martyrs passed to heaven on the 12th day of August, I plainly do not know. I do not remember seeing any of these things in the Acts of blessed Marcellus in Mombritius, nor anywhere else. But all these things are proof that Usuardus took from Ado and other Martyrologies what he might use as his own, when he had nothing better; and that he read many things which they had never read. Would that the Acts of those holy martyrs which he saw might now come forth from the darkness. For in those which are published there are almost as many fables as lines. Bouillart.] on the same day there suffered at Rome under the prefect Pertinax Quiriacus, etc.], Largio, Crescentianus, Nimmia and Juliana, with twenty others. Also in the city of Falari, the passion of Gracilianus and of Felicissima, virgin, whose mouths were first bruised with stones for Christ, and who then, struck with the sword, received the longed-for crown of martyrdom. In Syria, of Saints Macharius and Julian.

## On the Ides · 13 August

[0357]

At Rome, of blessed Ypolitus, martyr, who, for the glory of confession, at the command of the governor Valerian, bound by the feet to the necks of untamed horses, dragged thus through thistles and thorns, gave up the spirit. There suffered also Concordia his nurse, who, beaten with leaded scourges before him, was martyred: and nineteen others of his household, who were beheaded together. On the same day at Forosillae, the birthday of Saint Cassianus, who, when he had refused to worship, the boys were summoned, to whom he had become hateful by teaching, and the power of killing him was given them; and the weaker their hand was, the heavier they made the punishment of his martyrdom, death being delayed. [nt: Saint Radegundis was added to this article by a contemporary hand indeed, but certainly not the same; yet Sollerius admits her as written by Usuardus, making no mention meanwhile of the former erasure, which he keeps quiet whenever nothing occurs in his codices by which he might bring a charge of interpolation against the Pratensis codex. Nor is there any trace of this erasure in the Dervensis codex, although two whole lines were erased. They were erased, therefore, before any other copy. Therefore by the author. Bouillart.] At Poitiers, of Saint Radegundis, queen, whose life shone far and wide with virtues and miracles.

## The nineteenth day before the Kalends · 14 August

[0361]

The vigil of the Assumption of Saint Mary. At Rome, on the Appian Way, the birthday of blessed Eusebius, presbyter and confessor, who, for the defence of the Catholic faith, was shut up by Constantius Augustus in a certain chamber of his own house, and there, persevering steadfastly in prayer, received the falling-asleep.

## The eighteenth day before the Kalends · 15 August

[0365]

The falling-asleep of Saint Mary, the Mother of God, whose most sacred body, although it is not found upon the earth, yet holy mother Church so keeps her venerable memory as a feast, that she does not doubt that she passed away according to the condition of the flesh. But where that venerable temple of the Holy Spirit has been hidden by the divine will and counsel, the sobriety of the Church has chosen rather, with piety, not to know, than to teach anything frivolous and apocryphal by holding it from that source. At Rome, on the Appian Way, of Saint Tharsicius, acolyte and martyr, who, when on a certain day he was carrying the Sacraments of the body of Christ, and would not betray them to the pagans who were searching him, was so long wasted by them with cudgels and stones, until he breathed out his spirit.

## The seventeenth day before the Kalends · 16 August

[0367]

In Nicaea of Bithynia, the birthday of blessed Ursacius, confessor, who, under the persecutor Licinius, having abandoned military service and leading a solitary life, shone with such virtues that he is read to have both expelled demons and slain a huge dragon by praying. At the city of the *Metenses*, of Saint Arnulfus, bishop, who, illustrious for holiness of life and the grace of miracles, loving the hermit's life, rested by a blessed end. At Rome, of Saint Serena, once the wife of Diocletian Augustus.

## The sixteenth day before the Kalends · 17 August

[0371]

At Africa, of the holy martyrs Liberatus, abbot, Boniface, deacon, Servius and Rusticus, subdeacons, Rogatus and Septimus, monks, and Maximus, a boy; who, in the Vandal persecution, by order of king Hunericus, for the confession of the catholic faith and the defence of the one baptism, finished the splendid course of their contest, the Lord crowning them. In Caesarea of Cappadocia, the birthday of Saint Mammes, martyr, who suffered while Aurelian was emperor, under the governor Alexander. On this same day, the Octave of Saint Laurence, martyr.

## The fifteenth day before the Kalends · 18 August

[0373]

At the city of Praeneste, at the thirty-third milestone from the City, the birthday of Saint Agapitus, martyr, who, when he was fifteen years old and burned for martyrdom with the love of Christ, was seized by order of the emperor Aurelius, and first beaten a very long time with raw sinews: then from the governor Antiochus he suffers grievous tortures. Thereupon, when by the command of the emperor he was being exposed to lions, and was not harmed at all, he is struck with the sword of the attendants, to be crowned. On the same day at Rome, of the blessed presbyters John and Crispus, who in the persecution of Diocletian buried very many bodies of the saints most dutifully, and who afterwards, themselves also joined to their merits, merited the joys of life. On the Lavican Way, of Saint Helena, mother of the emperor Constantine.

## The fourteenth day before the Kalends · 19 August

[0377]

The birthday of Saint Magnus, or of Saint Andrew, martyr, with his companions, two thousand five hundred and ninety-seven. In the district *Sigistericus*, of blessed Donatus, presbyter, who, endowed with the wonderful grace of God from the very rudiments of infancy, led the anchoritic life for many years, and, renowned for the glory of miracles, passed to Christ. At Rome, of Saint Julius, senator and martyr, who, at the command of the emperor Commodus, was beaten with cudgels so long, until he gave up the spirit. In the territory of Bourges, of Saint Marianus, confessor.

## The thirteenth day before the Kalends · 20 August

[0379]

Of Samuel the prophet, whose sacred bones, as Jerome writes, Arcadius Augustus translated from Judaea to Thrace. On the same day, of blessed Porphirius, man of God, who instructed the holy martyr Agapitus in the faith and doctrine of Christ. On the island Herio, of Saint Philibertus, abbot, who, after temporal military service, bound over to the novitiate of Christ, became a devoted founder of monasteries. In the city of Cordoba, of the holy monks Leovigildus and Christopher, whose bodies, after the cutting off of the head, were given over to the fire

## The twelfth day before the Kalends · 21 August

[0383]

In the territory of the city *Gavalitana*, the passion of Saint Privatus, bishop and martyr, who suffered in the persecution of Valerian and Gallienus. On the same day, the birthday of the holy martyrs Bonosus and Maximianus, whose acts are extant. And in the city of Salona, of Saint Anastasius, martyr, who, for the confession of the name of Christ, was slain at the command of the emperor Aurelius.

## The eleventh day before the Kalends · 22 August

[0385]

At Rome, on the Ostian Way, the birthday of blessed Timotheus, martyr, who, seized by the prefect of the City, and wasted by a long custody in prison, when he had refused to sacrifice to idols, was beaten a third time and handled with most grievous tortures, and at the last was beheaded. On the same day at Augustudunum, of Saint Simphorianus, in the time of the emperor Aurelius, who, since he would not sacrifice to idols, was first afflicted with blows, then handed over, and at the last, his head cut off, consummated his martyrdom. At the Roman Port, of the holy pilgrim martyrs Martialis, Epictetus, Saturninus, Aprilis and Felix, with their companions. Also at Rome, of Saint Antonius, martyr, who, since he confessed himself a Christian freely, at the command of the judge Vitellius was condemned by capital sentence, and was buried on the Aurelian Way.



## The tenth day before the Kalends · 23 August

[0389]

The birthday of the holy martyrs Donatus, Restitutus, Valerianus and Fructuosa, with twelve others, who were crowned at Antioch with the most illustrious honour of confession. On the same day, of blessed Zacheus, bishop, who, fourth from James, ruled the church of Jerusalem most illustriously. At Lycia, in the city of Egea, of Saints Claudius, Asterius and Neon, who after bitter torments were fastened to the cross. At the Port of the city of Rome, of Saints Ypolitus, Quiriacus and Archillaus. At Alexandria, of Saint Theonas, bishop, venerable and truly worthy of God. [*Bouillart, in another order, with a few things added: . . . . .* were crowned, at Lycia, in the city of Egea, of the holy martyrs Claudius, Asterius, Neon, [nt: The Caroline autograph differs much. Zacheus, who is here in the fourth place, is put second in the Dervensis codex. Claudius and his companions, who occupy the second place in the Pratensis, the third in the Dervensis. Lastly, that Saint Claudius, who has four companions in the Pratensis, has only two in the Dervensis, namely Asterius and Neon. And to correct all these things, Usuardus blotted out five whole lines in his own codex. I will not say that the hand is the same; it is enough to have repeated that a hundred times. Let us see by what causes Usuardus was led to correct. For the order in which he arranged those saints, Sollerius, I think, will not summon the author to court. It is a thing of no account, on which it would be a scruple to dwell in defending it. Nor will the censor of the Pratensis codex deny that Domnina and Theonilla were rightly added to Claudius, Asterius and Neon. We have their proconsular acts, entire and genuine, where those five martyrs are called by name to confess the faith and are tortured with punishments; and at the end, *this passion was held in the city of Aegea, under the governor Lysias*, on the tenth *day before the Kalends of September, Augustus and Aristobolus being consuls*. In the Caroline autograph these words were not present, *who after bitter torments were fastened to the cross*, which Sollerius nevertheless inserted in his article as Usuardus's. The three martyrs Claudius, Asterius, Neon are named in the Dervensis codex with nothing added. Bouillart.] Domnina and Theonilla, who under the governor Lysias were tortured with various punishments and slain. At the Port of the city of Rome, of Saint Yppolitus, Quiriacus and Archillaus. On the same day, of blessed Zacheus, bishop, who, fourth from James, ruled the church of Jerusalem most illustriously. At Alexandria, of Saint Theonas, bishop, venerable and truly worthy of God.] Also the birthday of Saints Timotheus and Apollinaris, who, having consummated their martyrdom at the city of Reims, merited the heavenly kingdoms. At Lyon of Gaul, of the holy martyrs Minervius and Eleazarius, with eight sons.

## The ninth day before the Kalends · 24 August

[0393]

The birthday of blessed Bartholomew the apostle, who, preaching the Gospel of Christ in India, completed his martyrdom by beheading. The most sacred body of this apostle, translated first to the island of Lipari, then to Beneventum, is honoured with the pious veneration of the faithful. On the same day, at Carthage, of three hundred martyrs, who suffered in the time of Valerian and Gallienus: at length, after the tortures inflicted on them, confessing Christ the Son of God to be God, they were plunged into a burning kiln of lime. From which also that white-robed army of the blessed merited to be called the *Massa candida*, the White Mass. In the city of Rouen, of Saint Audoenus, confessor, who, wholesomely despising the world, by the merit of holiness obtained the honour of the episcopate. At Nevers, of Patricius, abbot.

## The eighth day before the Kalends · 25 August

[0397]

At Rome, the birthday of the holy martyrs Eusebius, Pontianus, Vincent and Peregrinus, under the emperor Commodus, who were first raised upon the rack, stretched also with sinews, and then beaten with cudgels, flames being applied about their sides; but when they remained most faithful in the praise of Christ, they were slain with leaded scourges until the giving up of the spirit. Also at Rome, of Saint Genesius, martyr, in the time of Diocletian Augustus, who, first beaten most cruelly with cudgels, hung upon the rack and harassed by a very long tearing of the hooks, set on fire also with torches, when he persisted in the faith, saying: There is no king but Christ, for whom, if I should be slain a thousand times, you will not be able to take him away from my mouth, nor him from my heart, merited the crown of martyrdom by the cutting off of his head. On the same day, of blessed Genesius of Arles, who, discharging the office of a notary, when he would not take down the impious edicts by which Christians were ordered to be punished, was seized and beheaded, and, baptized in his own blood, received the glory of martyrdom. In Spain [nt: The Dervensis codex: *in Spain, in the city of Italica*. Usuardus deleted *in Spain* in his own codex; for what cause, who could say? Was it because, speaking of a city well enough known, he judged it useless to name the region in which it lay? Of Saint Gerontius there is nothing in the martyrologists who are older than Usuardus. Beyond doubt he learned of his cult in Spain. The oldest thing extant about that Gerontius is an epigram of Isidore of Seville, which Juan Tamayo Salazar read written by hand and wove into his Spanish martyrology. In that epigram Gerontius is said to have suffered the punishments of prison and hunger under Nero. Whence Salazar gathers that he suffered about the year 68, when the cruelty of Nero raged most violently in Spain. Bouillart.], in the city of Italica, of Saint Gerontius, bishop, resting in prison.

## The seventh day before the Kalends · 26 August

[0401]

At Rome, the birthday of blessed Zephirinus, pope. And of the holy martyrs Hireneus and Abundius, who are read of in the passion of blessed Laurence. At the fort *Victimilium* of Italy, the birthday of blessed Secundus, martyr, a man of rank and a commander from the legion of the holy Thebeans. Also in the city of Pergamis, of Saint Alexander, who himself too was one from the legion of the Thebeans, and, since he confessed the name of the Lord Jesus most steadfastly, completed his martyrdom by the cutting off of his head. [*Bouillart: . . .* completed. [nt: Saint Aredius is lacking in the Caroline autograph; and in his place: *At Auxerre, of Eleutherius, bishop*. Afterwards Usuardus erased Eleutherius from here, having read, as may be conjectured, the Acts of that holy prelate, which record his death not on the 26th but on the 16th day of August. He is reckoned the sixteenth bishop of the Church of Auxerre, and they say he died in the year 551: if that is true, all the chronological marks which the Anonymous used in Labbe's new Bibliotheca, t. I, p. 419, are false. As regards Saint Aredius, Usuardus must have been deceived by certain Acts of that saint different from those which Mabillon, the chief ornament of our Congregation, made public, tom. I of the Acts, p. 349: for these relate that Aredius, on the ninth day before the Kalends of September, called his disciples together and warned them of his approaching death; and that he gave back his soul at the second hour of the night. If this second hour of the night means the second after midnight, Aredius will have died on the eighth day before the Kalends of September; but if it indicates only the second from sunset, he will have died on the ninth before the Kalends. Bernard Gui testifies, in Labbe's Bibliotheca, p. 631, that the feast of Saint Aredius is kept on the eighth *day before the Kalends of September*. Bouillart.] In the territory *Lemovicensis*, of Saint Aredius, presbyter and confessor.] At Auxerre, of Eleuterius, bishop.

## The sixth day before the Kalends · 27 August

[0405]

At Capua, the birthday of Saint Rufus, martyr, whom blessed Apollinaris, disciple of Peter the apostle, taught, this same Rufus being of patrician rank. In the city of Thomis, of the holy martyrs Marcellinus, a tribune, and his wife Mannea, John, Serapion and Peter. On the same day, the birthday of Saints Georgius, deacon, Aurelius, Felix, Nathalia and Liliosa, of whom the first, a monk of wonderful abstinence, coming from Jerusalem to Cordoba, merited to attain, with the rest, sprung of noble stock from that same city, the martyrdom long desired and shown to him beforehand by the Lord. In the city of Arles, of Saint Caesarius, bishop, a man of wonderful holiness and zeal for piety. At Augustudunum, of Saint Siagrius, bishop and confessor.

## The fifth day before the Kalends · 28 August

[0407]

At Rome, the birthday of blessed Hermes, an illustrious man, who, as is read in the acts of Alexander the pope, was first committed to custody in prison, then obtained martyrdom by the sword striking. In Constantinople, of Saint Alexander, bishop and confessor, a glorious old man, by the power of whose prayer Arius was condemned by the judgment of God. In Africa, the deposition of Saint Augustine, bishop, who, first translated from his own city to Sardinia on account of the barbarians, was lately brought back to Ticinum by the king of the Lombards, and honourably laid to rest. On this same day, the birthday of Saint Julian, martyr, who, in the time of persecution, at the urging of blessed Ferreolus, removed by a secret departure from the city of Vienne to the territory of the city *Arverna*, where at length, his throat cut, he was killed by a horrible death. At Sanctonas, of Saint Vibianus, bishop and confessor.

## The fourth day before the Kalends · 29 August

[0411]

The beheading, or rather the finding of the head, of the most blessed John the Baptist. For his beheading is proved from the Gospel reading to have happened about the Paschal solemnity; it is nevertheless kept here as a feast, when the head of the same was found a second time in the city of Emessa, and laid to rest in a church. At Rome, the birthday of the holy and most illustrious Sabina, martyr, who under the emperor Hadrian, struck with the sword, obtained the palm of martyrdom. In the district of Troyes, of Saint Sabina, virgin, who, having undertaken a most laborious pilgrimage for the love of Christ, glorious also for virtues and miracles, rested in peace. [nt: Here I would gladly let Sollerius go uncorrected. For although he found some fault in the Pratensis codex, he nevertheless deigned to number it among the pure. For which I thank him. But it will not be out of place to weaken the testimony of Castellanus even in the slightest matters. That most sharp-eyed inspector wrote that there is an erasure in the Pratensis from *Parisius dep.* to the end. This is true. Next, that there is now written on the erasure *ositio Mederici presbyteri et monachi*, etc. This I flatly deny: after *dep.* there follows next *sancti Mederici et monachi*. Lastly, that *Mederici episcopi* was once written there, as Sollerius charges, is most false: since the Dervensis codex calls Medericus not bishop but presbyter only. Nor was he ever a bishop; but first a monk, then abbot of one of the two monasteries which were at Autun at that time; at length at Paris, whither he had come for the sake of prayer, he exchanged life for death on the fourth day before the Kalends of September. These things are from his Acts, which our Mabillon edited, part I of the third century, p. 10. Before I leave here, I suffer some difficulty from which I should like Sollerius to extricate himself. On the same erasure on which Saint Medericus stands, Saint Candida stands too. The script of both corrections is the same. Yet of Saint Candida Sollerius says thus: *Certainly our codices sufficiently prove it to be Usuardus's.* What was added of Medericus, therefore, is equally Usuardus's. Now I ask Sollerius to come himself, to teach what difference there is between the script of this correction and that of the other corrections. For neither I nor any of the learned men of this city see any. Bouillart.] At Paris, the deposition [Bouillart adds *sancti*] of Medericus, presbyter. On this same day, of Saint Candida, virgin.

## The third day before the Kalends · 30 August

[0415]

At Rome, on the Ostian Way, the passion of blessed Felix, presbyter, under Diocletian and Maximian, emperors, who, after the torment of the rack, sentence being given, when he was being led to be beheaded, there met him a certain Christian; this man, while he confessed of his own accord that he was a Christian, was forthwith beheaded together with the same. Not knowing his name, [0417] the Christians called him Adauctus, because he was added to Saint Felix for the crown. Also at Rome, of Saint Gaudentia, virgin. [Bouillart adds: [nt: Castellanus was deceived, and deceived Sollerius, when he wrote that Saint Agilus was not entered in the first hand. Bouillart.] In the district *Meldensis*, of Saint Agilus, confessor.]

## The day before the Kalends · 31 August

[0419]

At Trier, the birthday of Saint Paulinus, bishop and confessor, who, banished into exile by the emperor Constantius for the Catholic faith, and worn out until death by the changing of exiles, even beyond the Christian name, at the last dying in Phrygia, received from the Lord the crown of a blessed passion. On the same day, at Athens, of blessed Aristides, most renowned in faith and wisdom, who offered to the emperor Hadrian books on the Christian religion, and, in the presence of the emperor himself, pleaded most brilliantly that Christ Jesus alone is God. At Auxerre, of Saint Optatus, bishop and confessor.

## SEPTEMBER HAS 30 DAYS.

[0423]

## On the Kalends · 1 September

[0423]

Of Jesus Nave and Gedeon the prophets. Also the birthday of the most blessed Anna the prophetess, whose holiness the Gospel's word makes known. At Capua, on the Aquarian Way, of Saint Priscus, martyr, who was one of the ancient disciples of Christ. At Reims, the deposition of Saint Sixtus, first bishop of that city. At Senones, of blessed Lupus, bishop and confessor, of whom it is related that on a certain day, while he was standing at the sacred altars with the clergy present, a gem fell from heaven into his holy chalice. At Cenomanni, of Saint Victor, bishop. [Bouillart adds, in italic type: [nt: An ancient hand set Egidius under this article, and so ancient that the difference is obscure. Yet Sollerius knew that it was other than the first, and we freely confess it. Why then, for so slight a cause, does he erase the Pratensis codex from the roll of the pure? Bouillart.] On the same day, the birthday of Saint Egidius, abbot.]

## The fourth day before the Nones · 2 September

[0427]

At Lyon of Gaul, the birthday of Saint Justus, bishop and confessor, who, withdrawing into the desert, when for some years he had led a life next to the angels, and a worthy end was at hand for such great labours, merited by a blessed gain to ascend to the kingdom of the heavens. His holy little body, with the bones of blessed Viator his minister, was afterwards brought back to Lyon. On the same day, at the aforesaid city, of Saint Helpidius, bishop and confessor. In Appamia, of Saint Antoninus, martyr.

## The third day before the Nones · 3 September

[0431]

The birthday of Saint Febe, of whom the blessed Apostle writes to the Romans. At Rome, the passion of blessed Serapia, virgin, under the emperor Hadrian, who, when she had been handed over to two lustful men and could not at all be abused, nor afterwards be set on fire with burning torches, was beaten with cudgels at the command of the governor, and so beheaded with the sword. The day of her passion is kept on the fourth day before the Kalends of August, but that of her burial on the present day, when also the memory of her martyrdom is celebrated more solemnly. In Capua, of the holy martyrs Antoninus, a boy of twenty years, and Aristeus, bishop, whose acts are extant. [Bouillart adds: [nt: With his usual fairness our censor did not judge the Pratensis codex pure, on account of the ordination of Saint Gregory added to the present article, although the difference of the scripts does not force itself upon the eyes. Bouillart.] At Rome, the ordination of Saint Gregory, pope.]

## The day before the Nones · 4 September

[0435]

Of Moyses the prophet. At Ancyra of Galatia, the birthday of the holy martyrs, three boys, Rufinus, Silvanus and Vitalicus. At Cabilonis, of Saint Marcellus, martyr, who, when he had been invited by the governor Priscus to a profane banquet, and, execrating feasts of that kind, rebuked with free reproach all who were present, why they were slaves to idols, the governor ordered him, by an unheard-of kind of cruelty, to be buried standing upright up to the waist; and so the holy martyr of God, persevering on the third day in the fear and praises of God, gave back an undefiled spirit. On this same day, of Saints Magnus and Castus.



## On the Nones · 5 September

[0439]

At Rome, of blessed Victorinus, martyr, who, illustrious for holiness and miracles, obtains the priesthood of the city *Amiternina* by the election of the whole people. Then afterwards, under the emperor Nerva, he was ordered to be hung head downward, in a place where stinking and sulphurous waters flow out; and when he had suffered this for three days for the name of Christ, gloriously crowned, he passed as victor to the Lord. Also at Rome, in Portus, the birthday of Saint Herculanus. At Capua, of the holy martyrs Quintus, Arcontius and Donatus. On the same day [In Bouillart, [nt: In the Caroline autograph: *On the same day, of Saint Bertinus, abbot*: and since this was against the custom of our author, he deleted the whole line and restored it in a smaller form of letters, so that there might be room in which to designate the place where Bertinus was chiefly venerated. And that place was fittingly designated by these words, *in the district Tarvenensis*. For at that time the monastery which Bertinus first ruled, or on whose building he put the finishing hand, stood some leagues distant from Tarvenna. But now it is enclosed within the walls of Saint-Omer. Bouillart.] in the district *Tarvenensis*, instead of *Eodem die*], of Saint Bertinus, abbot.

## The eighth day before the Ides · 6 September

[0441]

Of Zacharias the prophet, who, returning as an old man from Chaldea into his homeland, lies buried beside Aggeus the prophet. In Africa, of the blessed confessors and bishops Donatianus, Presidius, Mansuetus, Germanus, Fuscolus, who for the assertion of the catholic truth were most cruelly beaten and driven out into exile. Among whom also a bishop, Letus by name, an energetic and most learned man, after long-lasting filth of prison, was burned up by fire. Also in Cappadocia, in the city Reaten, of Saint Cottidi, deacon. [Bouillart adds in the margin: [nt: This commemoration, 'At Senones, of the holy siblings', etc., did not creep from the margin into the text, as Sollerius conjectured from ambiguous indications: but it is read even now in the margin, and indeed the upper one. Bouillart.] At Senones, of the holy siblings Sanctianus and Beata, and of Saint Augustine, bishop.]

## The seventh day before the Ides · 7 September

[0445]

At Nicomedia, the birthday of the most blessed John, martyr. He, kindled by an exceeding heat of faith, laid his hand on the book in which the cruel edicts against the Christians were contained, pulled it down, and tore it apart; and when this had been reported to Diocletian and Maximian, the Augusti, who were stationed in the same city, raging with exceeding cruelty they ordered every kind of torment to be spent upon him, which the most noble man bore with such great cheerfulness of face and spirit that he could not even have been seen to be sad on account of them. In the city of Orléans, the deposition of Saint Evurtius, confessor, who, as his acts testify, was first a subdeacon of the holy Roman Church, then by divine gift was designated through a dove as pontiff of the aforesaid city. In the territory *Augustudunensis*, of Saint Regina, virgin, who, under the proconsul Olibrius, having suffered the torments of the rack, of prison and of lamps, was at length ordered to be ended by capital sentence. Also in the territory of Paris, of Saint Chlodoaldus, presbyter, [nt: In the Caroline autograph, 'of Saint Chlodoaldus, presbyter and confessor'. Sollerius, who wished to admit nothing but the original, ought not in this matter to have preferred the Pratensis codex to his own: for that eulogy was added by Usuardus. Bouillart.] conspicuous for nobility as much of birth as of mind.

## The sixth day before the Ides · 8 September

[0449]

The nativity of the most blessed Mary, Mother of God, ever virgin. At Nicomedia, the birthday of Saint Adrianus, martyr, with twenty-three others, who all, after many tortures, consummated their martyrdom by the breaking of the legs, under Diocletian Augustus. At Alexandria, of Saints Ammon, Theophilus, Neotherius and twenty-two others. Also at Antioch, of Timotheus and Faustus.

## The fifth day before the Ides · 9 September

[0451]

At Nicomedia, the passion of the blessed martyrs Dorotheus and Gorgonius, who, in the presence of Diocletian, when they detested the persecution which he was bringing upon the Christians, were ordered first to be hung up and torn with scourges over the whole body: thereafter, their entrails laid bare of the skin, to be drenched with vinegar and salt, and so to be roasted on a gridiron, and at the last to be killed by the noose. But after an interval of time blessed Gorgonius was translated to Rome and laid on the Latin Way. Among the Sabines, at the thirtieth milestone from the City, of Saints Jacinctus, Alexander and Tiburtius. In the territory *Taruanensis*, [nt: In all the copies, the Dervensis too, these are the words: *In the territory Tarvennensis*. Yet in the Pratensis they are written on an erasure. The erasure, then, is older than all the copies; made, therefore, by the author. Bouillart.] of Saint Autmarus, bishop and confessor. In Scotia, of Queranus, abbot.

## The fourth day before the Ides · 10 September

[0455]

At Rome, of blessed Hilary, pope. At Africa, the birthday of the holy bishops Nemesianus, Felix, Lucius: also of Felix, Litteus, Polianus, Victor, Jader and Dativus, who under Decius and Valerian, as the rage of persecution rose up, at the first steadfastness of the confession of Christ were grievously beaten with cudgels, then bound with fetters, and assigned to dig the mines, and consummated the contest of a glorious confession. There is extant a letter of blessed Cyprian written to them and about them. On the same day at Chalcedon, of Saints Sosthenes and Victor, who for the confession of the faith, under the consul Priscus, overcoming prison, chains and beasts, at length, called from heaven in prayer, gave up the spirit.

## The third day before the Ides · 11 September

[0457]

At Rome, on the old Salarian Way, the birthday of the holy martyrs Protus and Jacinctus, eunuchs, who, under the emperor Gallienus, having been caught because they were Christians, are compelled to sacrifice; but, not consenting, they are first most cruelly beaten, and then are beheaded together.

## The day before the Ides · 12 September

[0461]

At the city of Ticinum, of the holy confessors Syrus and Iventius, who, sent by blessed Hermagoras to the aforesaid city, first preaching the Gospel of Christ there, and flashing with great powers and miracles, illuminated the neighbouring cities also with divine works; and so, in pontifical honour, they rested with a glorious end in peace.

## On the Ides · 13 September

[0463]

At Egypt, in the city of Alexandria, of blessed Philip, bishop, father of Saint Eugenia, virgin. He, deserting the dignity of the prefecture and obtaining the grace of baptism, afterwards attained the honour of the episcopate; and while he was set in prayer, Perennius the prefect ordered him to have his throat cut with the sword, in the time of the emperors Volusianus and Gallienus. On the same day, of Saint Amatus, presbyter and abbot of the monastery of Romaricus, who, a follower of wonderful abstinence and of the anchoritic life, led a way of life made illustrious by the grace of virtues and miracles. At Angers, of Saint Maurilio, bishop and confessor.

## The eighteenth day before the Kalends · 14 September

[0467]

The exaltation of the holy cross, when the emperor Heraclius brought it back from Persis to Jerusalem. But also, as the years ran on, Pope Sergius, the Lord revealing it, found a portion of wonderful size of the same wood in the sacristy of blessed Peter, which every year, on the very day of its exaltation, is kissed and adored by all the people. At Rome, on the Appian Way, of blessed Cornelius, pope, whose mouth, after the banishment of exile, Decius ordered to be beaten with leaded scourges, and so to be beheaded with twenty-one others of mixed sex. But also Cerealis, a soldier, with his wife Salustia, whom the same Cornelius had instructed in the faith, was beheaded on the same day. In Africa, of Saint Cyprian, bishop, who under the emperor Valerian, after a long exile, consummated his martyrdom by the cutting off of the head, at the sixth milestone from Carthage, beside the sea. There are reported as having suffered with him Crescentianus, Victor, Rosula and Generalis.

## The seventeenth day before the Kalends · 15 September

[0471]

At Rome, on the Numentan Way, the birthday of blessed Nicomedes, presbyter and martyr, under the emperor Domitian. When he said to those compelling him to sacrifice: I do not sacrifice except to God almighty, who reigns in the heavens, he was beaten for a very long time with leaded scourges and passed to the Lord. On the same day, in the territory *Cabilonensis*, of Saint Valerianus, martyr, whom the governor Priscus, having him hung up and tortured with heavy tearing of the claws, when he saw him immovable in the confession of Christ and persisting with joyful mind in His praises, caused to be put to the sword. At Tullum, of Saint Aper, bishop and confessor. Also at Carnotum, of Saint Leobinus, bishop.

## The sixteenth day before the Kalends · 16 September

[0473]

At the city of Chalcedon, the birthday of Saint Eufemia, virgin and martyr, who, under the proconsul Priscus, overcame for Christ torments and prisons, blows and the contrivances of wheels, fires and the weights of angular stones, beasts and strokes of rods, axes and fiery frying-pans, and again the bite of a beast. At Rome, of the holy martyrs Lucia, a noble matron, and Geminianus, whom Diocletian, grievously afflicted with punishments and long tortured, at length, after the praiseworthy victory of martyrdom, ordered to be put to the sword.

## The fifteenth day before the Kalends · 17 September

[0477]

At Rome, on the Tiburtine Way, the birthday of Saint Justinus, presbyter, who in the persecution of Decius, Gallus and Volusianus was most distinguished in the glory of confession. Also at Rome, of the holy martyrs Narcissus and Crescentio. At Leodium, of blessed Lambert, bishop *Tungrensis*, who, slain innocently by the guilty, entered the hall of the heavenly kingdom, to live for ever. In the Britains, of Saints Socrates and Stephen. At Nivedunum, of the holy martyrs Valerianus, Macrinus and Gordianus. Also at Cordoba, of Saint Emilianus, deacon, and of Hieremias, beheaded.

## The fourteenth day before the Kalends · 18 September

[0481]

The birthday of blessed Methodius, bishop of Olimpus of Licia and afterwards of Tyre, who under Diocletian, at Chalcis of Greece, as Saint Jerome writes, was crowned with martyrdom. At Vienne, of Saint Ferreolus, who, since he was of tribunician power, was seized by order of a most impious governor, and first most cruelly beaten, then loaded with the heavy weight of chains, was thrust into a most foul prison, and afterwards received the palm of martyrdom by the cutting off of the head.

## The thirteenth day before the Kalends · 19 September

[0483]

In Naples of Campania, the birthday of the saints Januarius, bishop of the city *Beneventana*, Festus and Proculus, deacons, Desiderius, Euticus and Acuti, who after chains and prisons were beheaded in the city *Puteolana*, under the emperor Diocletian. Also in Palestine, of the holy martyrs Peleus and Nilus, bishops, who in the time of persecution were consumed by fire for Christ with very many clergy. At Nuceria, the birthday of the holy martyrs Felix and Constantia, who suffered under Nero. In the territory of the city of Langres, of Saint Sequanus, presbyter.

## The twelfth day before the Kalends · 20 September

[0487]

In Cyzicus, the birthday of the holy martyrs Fausta, virgin, and Evilasius, under the emperor Maximian; whom the same Evilasius, since he was first of the palace, ordered first to be dishonoured, hung up, tortured, and to be sawn through the middle like wood; but afterwards, himself also believing in Christ, he underwent the contest together with Fausta. [nt: The Caroline autograph inserts between the first and second announcements these words: 'Also in the times of the emperor Hadrian, the passion of the blessed Eustachius, surnamed Placidus, and of his wife Theospis, whose wonderful acts are read.' Nor has it a word of Eulogius of Cordoba. Yet Sollerius on this day rejected the Heriniensis codex, which was most pure. For what cause, I ask? Four lines had been blotted out in the Pratensis codex; the Heriniensis, his Achilles, was against the Pratensis. Was there anything else, anywhere, as a cause why he should reject the Pratensis? For the rest, I do not wonder that Usuardus struck Eustachius out of his codex: but I wonder greatly that he could ever have admitted him. Concerning Eulogius of Cordoba, on what day he won the palm of martyrdom, this one or II March, there is great controversy. That Usuardus, a contemporary of Eulogius, almost an eyewitness of his martyrdom, was mistaken is not credible. I embrace Sollerius's opinion and declare it in his own words: 'To me certainly there is no doubt that Usuardus, who beheld the contests of Cordoba almost at close quarters, had a reason weighty for that time why he should place Eulogius on this day rather than on 11 March.' Bouillart.] In the city of Cordoba, of blessed Eulogius, presbyter, beheaded for the martyrdom of Christ. In Phrygia, of Saints Dionysius and Privatus.

## The eleventh day before the Kalends · 21 September

[0491]

The birthday of blessed Matthew, apostle and evangelist, who, preaching at Ethiopia, suffered martyrdom. His Gospel, written in the Hebrew tongue, was found, himself revealing it, in the time of the emperor Zeno. On the same day, on the Claudian Way, at the twentieth milestone from the City, the passion of Saint Alexander, bishop, who for the faith of Christ, under the emperor Antoninus, overcoming chains, cudgels, the rack, burning lamps, the tearing of the claws, beasts and the flames of the furnace, at length by the sword obtained a glorious life. Also at Rome, of Saint Pamphilus, martyr.



## The tenth day before the Kalends · 22 September

[0493]

In the Gauls, in the city of Sedunum, at the place Acaunum, the birthday of the holy martyrs the Thebeans, Maurice, Exuperius, Candidus, Victor, Innocentius, Vitalis, with their companions, six thousand five hundred, who, suffering for Christ under Maximian, were most gloriously crowned. At Beuuaria, [nt: In this article these words, *of Saint Emerammus*, have been written over an erasure: likewise whatever words are set between *stupri* (of debauchery) and *in pago* (in the district). Yet no trace of either erasure appears in the other codices. But a correction that is older than all the copies, to whom is it to be ascribed but to the author? Bouillart.] of Saint Emerammus, bishop and martyr. He persuaded that a crime of debauchery committed by a certain man should be imputed to himself for the sake of Christ, and accordingly bore patiently the peril of death. In the district of Poitiers, of Saint Florentius, presbyter and confessor. Also, of Saint Silvanus, confessor, in the territory of Bourges.

## The ninth day before the Kalends · 23 September

[0497]

In Campania, the birthday of blessed Sosius, deacon of the city *Messenata*. When at a certain time he was reading the Gospel in the church of the aforesaid city, in the presence of Bishop Januarius, the same bishop suddenly saw a flame rising from his head, and declared that he would be a martyr. And after not many days, when he was thirty years old, he received martyrdom with the same bishop by the cutting off of the head. On the same day, of Saint Tecla, virgin, of the city of Iconium, who in the confession of Christ vanquished fire and beasts, and after many contests, coming to Seleucia for the teaching of many, rested in peace. In the territory of the city of Constantia, of Saint Paternus, bishop and confessor.

## The eighth day before the Kalends · 24 September

[0501]

The conception of Saint John the Baptist. And at Augustidunum, the birthday of Saint Andochius, presbyter, Tyrsus, deacon, and Felix, who, sent from the East by Policarpus the bishop to teach Gaul, were most gloriously crowned under the emperor Aurelian. For, beaten with whips, at the last hung up the whole day by their hands turned back, sent into the fire but not burned, at length they are struck on the necks with bars.

## The seventh day before the Kalends · 25 September

[0503]

The birthday of blessed Cleophas, who, they relate, was slain by the Jews at the village of Emaus, in the same house in which he had prepared a table for the Lord, for the confession of Him, and was buried with glorious memory. In the city of Amiens, of blessed Firminus, bishop, who under the governor Rictionarus, after various torments, took up martyrdom by the beheading of his head. At Lyon, the deposition of Saint Lupus, bishop, formerly an anchorite. On this same day, of Saint Herculanus, [0505] soldier, who is read of in the passion of Alexander the bishop. At Auxerre [nt: Castellanus rightly advised that the announcement of Aunarius was erased and written anew in a more compressed character, so that Saint Sollempnis could be added. But that correction is of the same age and the same author as the three others which we have already seen this month. For the Dervensis agrees with the Heriniensis codex and records Saint Sollempnis. The correction therefore belongs to both autographs, and so is older even than the first copy. Bouillart.], of Saint Aunarius, bishop and confessor. [Bouillart adds: Also of Saint Sollempnensis, bishop.]

## The sixth day before the Kalends · 26 September

[0507]

The birthday of the holy martyrs Cyprian, bishop, and Justina, virgin; of whom Justina, having suffered many things for Christ, converted to Christ Cyprian himself also, when he was a magician and was trying to drive her mad with his magic arts; with whom afterwards, when he had now been made a bishop and a noble teacher, she took up martyrdom. Their bodies were afterwards carried to Rome by Christians. In the city of Albanum, of Saint Senator.

## The fifth day before the Kalends · 27 September

[0511]

At the city of Egea, the birthday of the holy martyrs Cosmas and Damian, who, in the persecution of Diocletian, after many torments, chains and prisons, after the sea and fires, the cross, stoning and arrows had been overcome by divine power, are beheaded. There are reported also as having suffered in their company three full brothers of theirs, that is, Anthimus, Leontius and Euprepius. On the same day, of the holy brothers Adulfus and John, who were crowned for Christ at the city of Cordoba. At the fortress Pseudunum, of Saint Florentinus, who, together with blessed Hilary, after the cutting out of the tongue, was ordered to be struck with the sword.

## The fourth day before the Kalends · 28 September

[0515]

At Toulouse, of Saint Exuperius, bishop and confessor, who, the blessed man, how sparing he was to himself and how generous to others, Saint Jerome has set out in a memorable account. At Rome, the birthday of Saint Stacteus. In the city of Genoa, of Saint Salonis, bishop and confessor.

## The third day before the Kalends · 29 September

[0517]

On Mount Garganus, the venerable memorial of blessed Michael the archangel, where a church consecrated in his name is held, made in a mean fashion, but endowed with heavenly power. In Thrace, the birthday of Saints Euticus, Plautus and Eraclea. At Auxerre, of Saint Fraternus, bishop and confessor.

## The day before the Kalends · 30 September

[0521]

In the Gauls, at the fortress Solodorum, the passion of the holy martyrs Victor and Ursus, of the glorious legion of the Thebeans, who, first tortured with dire punishments, but, a heavenly light flashing over them and the ministers falling to the earth, were delivered; then sent into the fire, but in nothing at all harmed, at the last were consummated by the sword. On the same day, at Bethlehem of Judah, the deposition of blessed Jerome, presbyter, who died in the ninety-eighth year of his age, in the sixth month. In the city of Placentia, of Saint Antoninus, confessor.

## OCTOBER HAS 31 DAYS.

[0525]

## On the Kalends · 1 October

[0525]

At Rome, the birthday of blessed Arethas, martyr, and of five hundred and four others. In the city of Thomis, of Saints Priscus, Crescens and Evagrius. At the province of Lusitania, in the city of Olisepona, of the holy martyrs Verissimus, Maxima and Julia, sisters. In the city of Tornacum, the passion of Saint Piato, presbyter, who with blessed Dionysius, bishop, and his companions went from the city of Rome to Gaul for the sake of preaching, and afterwards, his martyrdom consummated, passed to Christ. On the same day, the translation of the holy confessors Germanus and Remigius, of whom the former ruled the church of Auxerre, but the other that of Reims. In the port of Ganda, of Saint Bavo, confessor. [Bouillart adds, in italic type: [nt: All seven lines of this entry have been wretchedly defaced with the knife. Ample matter for Sollerius's divining, if Castellanus had advised him. But if he had advised him? Could that inspector have been idle at so great a turning-point of things, who most skilfully noted variations however slight? Did he not notice so ugly an erasure, he who suggested to Sollerius that the translation of Saint Vedastus, a thing of no account, had been joined to the article in a more recent hand? Yet that critic of the Pratensis codex, so rigid elsewhere, copies out all those saints. There was, I suppose, one of the monks of Saint-Germain who, noticing that Greven and Molanus dissented from his codex, accommodated his own style to Usuardus's. Bouillart.] And the translation of the body of Saint Vedastus, bishop.]

## The sixth day before the Nones · 2 October

[0529]

At Nicomedia, the birthday of Saint Eleutherius, martyr, with innumerable others, of whom, at the command of the emperor Diocletian, some were cut down with swords, some were burned with fires, some were thrown headlong into the sea; but the first of these, Eleutherius, when, long tortured, he was rendered stronger through each torment, completed the martyrdom of his victory, tried like gold by fires. In the territory *Adartensis*, the passion of blessed Leodegarius, bishop *Augustudunensis*, whom, afflicted for the truth with various injuries and diverse tortures, Ebroinus, mayor of the royal house, slew. On this same day, of Saint Serenus, confessor.

## The fifth day before the Nones · 3 October

[0533]

The birthday of blessed Dionisius, bishop and martyr, who, after a most illustrious confession of the faith, after the gravest kinds of torments, was crowned with a glorious martyrdom, as Aristides the Athenian testifies, a man wonderful in faith and wisdom, in that work which he composed on the Christian religion. At the Old Saxons, of the holy martyrs, the two Ewaldi, who, when they were presbyters and had begun to preach Christ there, were seized by the pagans and killed; whose bodies a great light, appearing long by night, declared both where they were and of what merit they were. At Rome, at *Ursus pilleatus*, of Saint Candidus, martyr.

## The fourth day before the Nones · 4 October

[0537]

At Corinth, the birthday of the blessed Crispus and Caius, whom Saint Paul the apostle mentions, writing to the Corinthians. In Egypt, of Saints Mark and Marcianus, brothers, and of innumerable others with them, of no inferior glory, of either sex and age; of whom some, after blows and horrible tortures of diverse kinds, were given over to flames, others thrown headlong into the sea, not a few also beheaded, very many consumed by hunger, others fastened to gibbets, some also, the head pressed downward and the feet raised on high, merited the most blessed crown of the passion. In the city of Paris, of Saint Aurea, virgin.

## The third day before the Nones · 5 October

[0541]

At Sicily, the birthday of the holy martyrs Placidus, Euticius and thirty others. In Eumenia, of blessed Traseus, bishop, consummated by martyrdom at Smyrna. In the Gauls, in the city of Valentia, of Saint Apollinaris, bishop, whose life was both distinguished by virtues, and his death no less is adorned with signs and prodigies. At Auxerre, the deposition of the holy siblings Firmatus, deacon, and Flaviana, virgin.

## The day before the Nones · 6 October

[0543]

At Capua, the birthday of the holy martyrs Marcellus, Castus, Emilius and Saturninus. On the same day, of blessed Sagaris, martyr and bishop of Laodicea, who was one of the ancient disciples of Paul the apostle. In the city of Agennum, the birthday of Saint Fides, virgin and martyr, by whose example blessed Caprasius was animated to the contest of martyrdom.

## On the Nones · 7 October

[0547]

At Rome [nt: This whole article is pure. Wholly Usuardus's; Sollerius neither rejects a syllable nor adds a stroke. He only throws back to the last place Saints Marcellus and Apuleius, who had been put second by Usuardus. Yet the whole, from *of blessed Mark, pope* to the end, has been blotted out. Let the reader pardon us if we drive the same things home too often, and lay the blame on Sollerius, who, though he has so often abused erasures to disparage the Pratensis codex, yet leaves so many erasures unremarked. That affected silence of Sollerius it is very much our concern to point out often: because by it chiefly his whole censure is shaken. For if erasures give back Usuardus as faithfully as the untouched places, it is plain that erasures cannot be a rule for rejecting a codex. For there is no rule that is common to the true and the false. A property, as the logicians lay down, cannot be marked by a common sign. Bouillart.], on the Appian Way, the deposition of blessed Mark, pope. At the province which is called Augusta Eufratesia, of the holy martyrs Sergius and Bachus, under the emperor Maximian; of whom Bachus was beaten so long with raw sinews, until, wholly torn apart in body, he gave up the spirit in the confession of Christ: but Sergius, shod on his feet with nailed boots, when he remained fixed in the faith, sentence having been given, was ordered to be beheaded. Also at the same province, of Saint Julia, virgin, who under the governor Marcianus consummated her martyrdom. On the same day, of the holy martyrs Marcellus and Apuleius, who, through the Apostle Peter, having left Simon, gave themselves over to the apostolic teaching, and afterwards, under Aurelian the consular, carried off the crown of martyrdom, being buried not far from the city of Rome.

## The eighth day before the Ides · 8 October

[0551]

The birthday of the most blessed old man Simeon, who is read in the Gospel to have received the Lord in his arms. At Thessalonica, the passion of Saint Demetrius, martyr. Also in the city of Seville, of Saint Peter, martyr. In the territory of Laon, of Saint Benedicta, virgin and martyr. On this same day, of Saint Pelagia, who is called the sinner.

## The seventh day before the Ides · 9 October

[0555]

Of Abraham the patriarch. At Paris, the birthday of the holy martyrs Dionisius, bishop, Rusticus, presbyter, and Eleutherius, deacon; which blessed bishop, directed by the Roman pontiff into the Gauls for the sake of preaching, came to the aforesaid city, where for some years ardently pursuing the work committed to him, at length by the prefect Fescenninus, together with his companions, put to the sword, he completed his martyrdom. At Julia, on the Claudian Way, of Saint Domninus, martyr, under Maximian, who, when he wished to decline the rage of persecution, being at once pursued, and nonetheless struck with the sword, fell gloriously.



## The sixth day before the Ides · 10 October

[0557]

At Crete, of blessed Pinitus, most noble among the bishops, who in his writings left behind, as in a mirror, a living image of himself. In the city of Cologne, of Saint Gereon, martyr, surnamed Mallosus, with three hundred and eighteen others, who in the persecution of the tyrant Maximian submitted their necks patiently to the swords for true piety. [0559] Also in the territory of the same city, of Saint Victor, martyr, and seventeen others. Also of the holy martyrs Cassius and Florentius, with many others. In Britain, of Saint Paulinus, bishop and confessor.

## The fifth day before the Ides · 11 October

[0561]

At Tarsus, the metropolis of Cilicia, the birthday of the most blessed martyrs Tharacus, Probus and Andronicus, who in the persecution of Diocletian, afflicted for a long time with the filth of prison, and a third time tried with diverse torments and tortures, obtained the triumph of glory in the confession of Christ. In the district *Vilcasinus*, the passion of the saints Nigasius, [0563] presbyter, and his companions Quirinus and Pientia. [nt: Not certain words here, not a few lines, but the article from head to foot has been wretchedly defiled and torn with the knife, and no trace of the old article remains. Turn over your codices, Reverend Father: where has the original simplicity of Usuardus gone, if not the author himself but a faithless corrupter brought the corrections into the Pratensis codex? Bouillart.] In Scotia, of Saint Cainichus, abbot. In the city of Uzetia, of Saint Firminus, bishop and confessor.

## The fourth day before the Ides · 12 October

[0565]

At Ravenna, on the Laurentine Way, the birthday of Saint Hedistius, martyr. In Africa, of the holy confessors and martyrs, four thousand nine hundred and seventy-six, under King Hunnericus, who, since they were bishops, presbyters, deacons of the Churches of God, with crowds of the faithful peoples joined to them, for the defence of the catholic truth, [0567] were thrust into the exile of a dreadful desert, and at the last variously tortured, celebrated their martyrdom; among whom were Cyprian and Felix, eminent priests of the Lord. In Syria, of Saint Eustachius, presbyter.

## The third day before the Ides · 13 October

At Troas, the birthday of blessed Carpus, disciple of the apostle Paul. In the Spains, in the city of Cordoba, the passion of Saints Faustus, Januarius and Martialis, who, first tortured with the punishment of the rack, then with their eyebrows shaved, their ears also and noses cut off, their upper teeth also pulled out, at the last consummated their martyrdom by the suffering of fire. At Antioch, of Saint Theophilus, who held the pontificate of the Church sixth from the apostle Peter. At Tours, of Saint Venantius, abbot. [Bouillart adds, in italic type: [nt: « We have excluded the Pratensis codex from the pure, says Sollerius, because at the end it has an addition: *On this same day, of the holy confessors Giraldus and Leobonus.* » I pardon him, if he was not advised that those holy confessors were added by a more recent hand. Bouillart.] On this same day, of the holy confessors Giraldus and Leobonus.]

## The day before the Ides · 14 October

[0573]

At Rome, on the Aurelian Way, the birthday of blessed Calistus, pope and martyr. The emperor Alexander ordered him, under prolonged custody, to be tormented with hunger and to be beaten daily with cudgels; but at length, thrown headlong through the window of the house in which he was being guarded, he merited the triumph of victory. In the city *Tudertina*, of Saint Fortunatus, bishop, who shone with the grace of immense power in putting unclean spirits to flight.

## On the Ides · 15 October

[0575]

At Cologne, the birthday of the fifty holy martyrs who, since they were of the sacred legion of the Thebeans, completed the course of their contest at the same city. At Rome, on the Aurelian Way, of Saint Fortunatus at Lyon, of Saint Antiochus, bishop, who, having energetically administered the height of the pontificate to which he had been taken up, obtained the heavenly kingdom. In the territory of Reims, of Saint Basolus, confessor.

## The seventeenth day before the Kalends · 16 October

[0579]

In Africa of two hundred and seventy holy martyrs, crowned together, and of the holy martyrs Martianus and Satirianus with their two brothers, who, for the constancy of the catholic faith, first beaten with knotted cudgels and torn to the bones, when they suffered such things for a long time, were always restored unharmed on the following day; at the last, in the banishment of exile, their feet bound behind the backs of running four-horse chariots, among thorny places of the woods, they were together ordered to perish. Maxima also, a virgin, suffered with them. In the territory [0581] of Bourges, of Saint Ambrose, confessor. [Bouillart: [nt: For 'in the district of Bourges' Sollerius writes 'in the territory of Bourges'. On what authority? Is it because there is an erasure here in the Pratensis codex? But he admits Saint Ambrose *Caturcensis*, set likewise on an erasure. Then he says coldly: *The Pratensis has besides an addition: at the monastery Dervum, of Saint Bercharius, abbot and martyr.* And for that cause Molanus alone is either pure or next to pure. Yet that cause does not seem just, except that he conceals what he knew well, that that addition is of a more recent hand. The Dervensis codex calls Ambrose *Caturcensis* not bishop but confessor, and adds: *Also in the territory of Toul, of Saint Elifius, martyr.* Bouillart.] of Saint Ambrose, bishop *Caturcensis*; and he adds, in cursive type: At the monastery Dervum, of Saint Bercharius, martyr and abbot.]

## The sixteenth day before the Kalends · 17 October

[0585]

In Antioch, the birthday of Saint Hero, disciple of blessed Ignatius the martyr, who, made bishop after him, follows the way of his master as a dutiful imitator, and fell, a lover of Christ, for the flock entrusted to him. In the city *Arausica*, of Saint Florentius, bishop, who, famous for many virtues, rested in peace. [Bouillart adds: [nt: Sollerius judges the commemoration of Saint Vincent a mere addition, on the authority of the Heriniensis and Tornacensis, most approved codices, although he himself cites ten codices which imitate the Pratensis, and all ours have the same reading. I have long restrained myself from setting my tooth into those two codices. But I have been patient too long. The reader will perhaps wonder how I can lower the authority of codices which I have neither seen nor been able to see: but Sollerius's censure has this convenience, that the defences in which he most trusts he himself betrays, either in good faith or by negligence. How much those two codices ought to be valued, the use which they have so far rendered Sollerius will show, if anything does. On the days of this month I, XI, XV, XVI; of September I, III, VII, X, XX, XXV, XXVII; of August XIX, XXV; of July I, XI, XVIII; of June I, III, VIII, XXI, XXIII; of May I, IX, XXIX; of April XXX; of March XVI, XXV; of February III, X, XV; of January XXIII; both are excluded from the pure: and the days on which one or the other is excluded are so many through the year that I could not bear the tedium of counting them. Here there is an addition, there an omission, now a cutting-down of a eulogy, elsewhere depraved and corrupt readings. From these codices, forsooth, Sollerius corrects the Pratensis. Bouillart.] In the territory of Nevers, of Saint Vincent, presbyter and confessor.]

## The fifteenth day before the Kalends · 18 October

[0589]

The birthday of blessed Luke the evangelist, who, when he was seventy-three years old, died in Bithynia full of the Holy Spirit, whose bones in the twentieth year of Constantius were translated to Constantinople. On the same day, of Saint Asclepiades, bishop of Antioch, who was one of the illustrious number of confessors who suffered gloriously under Decius. Also at Rome, of Saint Triphonia, wife of Decius Caesar. In the territory of Beauvais, of Saint Justus, martyr.

## The fourteenth day before the Kalends · 19 October

[0593]

At Alexandria, the metropolis of Egypt, the birthday of the holy martyrs Ptolomeus and Lucius, under Antoninus surnamed Pius; of whom the former, wasted for a long time with the filth of prison, and at the last, when he bore witness to the teaching of Christ by public confession, was ordered to be led to death. The latter also, when he confessed most freely that he was a Christian, received a like sentence. In Antioch of Syria of the holy martyrs Beronicus, Pelagia and forty-nine others. [Bouillart adds in the margin: [nt: Although a more recent hand wrote Saints Savinianus and Potentianus in the margin, Sollerius nonetheless counted the Pratensis among the pure codices. I beg the reader to notice by what reason he was moved to do so: because, he says, what has been set in the margin more recently does no harm to the integrity of the text. He was of the same fairness on 18 January, 21 February, 13 and 25 April, 15 May, 8 and 28 July, 6 September. I ask you, Sollerius, tell me what difference there is between the things that have been set more recently in the margin and those that have been added more recently in the remaining space of the article? You say in your preface that nothing was disputed and discussed by you against the Pratensis codex except for the sake of tracking down the truth. I beg and beseech you, by that zeal for truth with which you burn, to assign me that difference. But if you cannot, with what good faith, with what zeal for truth, did you disdain to number the Pratensis codex among the pure on 10 June on account of Saint Landericus; on 18 July on account of Saint Arnulfus; on 1 September on account of Saint Egidius; on the 3rd of the same month on account of Saint Gregory; on 19 November on account of Saint Odo? Again, if what has been set in the margin more recently does no harm to the integrity of the text, why on the 24th of this month do you reject the Pratensis codex, although Maglorius is written outside the text and in the margin? In vain you hide that you were advised by Castellanus. No one would believe that it escaped his sight, whom everywhere you proclaim a most sharp-eyed inspector. Bouillart.] The translation of the holy martyrs Savinianus, Potentianus and their companions.]

## The thirteenth day before the Kalends · 20 October

[0597]

At the province *Aviensis*, the birthday of blessed Maximus, levite and martyr, who, from desire of suffering, showed himself openly to the persecutors seeking him, and after the constancy of his answers, hung upon the rack and tortured, then beaten with cudgels, and at the last overwhelmed, fell. In the Gauls, in the city of Agennum, of Saint Caprasius, martyr, who, when, declining the rage of persecution, he was hiding in a cave, at length, animated to the endurance of sufferings, hastened to the arena of the contest, and by fighting bravely merited the palm of martyrdom. In the city of Cologne, the passion of the holy virgins Martha and Saula with many others. On this same day, the reception of the holy martyrs Georgius, deacon, and Aurelius [nt: The Dervensis codex adds: « On this same day, the deposition of Saint Sindulfus, confessor, who, contending in the arena of contempt of the world, turned the revolving sun to use, and, perfectly despising the present age, followed Christ with his whole heart. Whose conversion, shining with virtues and miracles, declares that he led a celibate life. And who, fleeing effectually the twofold land and leaping forth from it, sowing in tears with the patriarchs, and leaving the fruit of a holy way of life, sacrificing himself for Christ with the apostles, stretching out both hands with the martyrs from the sea of this pilgrimage to the shore, filling his fingers with most approved myrrh with the confessors, answered the bridegroom of his soul with a new song with the virgins, until he should run to meet him upon the mountains of spices, like a roe and a young hart. » These things are drawn from the Life of Saint Sindulfus, which Almannus, monk of Hautvillers, wrote in the ninth century, and our Mabillon edited, tom. I *Act.*, p. 368. Everyone knows that the monasteries of Hautvillers and of Der were first founded by Saint Nivardus: from which kinship it came about that the feast days of both were common. Bouillart.].

## The twelfth day before the Kalends · 21 October

[0601]

At Nicomedia, the birthday of the holy martyrs Dasius, Zoticus, Gaius with twelve soldiers. On the same day, of our holy Father Hilarion, whose Life, full of virtues, Jerome writes. In the city of Ostia, of Saint Asterius, presbyter, who is read of in the passion of blessed Calistus, pope. On this same day, of Saint Viator, minister of blessed Justus, bishop of Lyon [nt: In the Dervensis codex, before the last commemoration, *In the city of Lyon, of Saint Cilinia, mother* of the most blessed Remigius, archbishop of Reims. Bouillart.].

## The eleventh day before the Kalends · 22 October

[0605]

At Adrianopolis of Thrace, the birthday of the holy martyrs Philip, bishop, Eusebius and Hermes. Also of blessed Mark, bishop, a most illustrious and most learned man, who first from the Gentiles received the church of Jerusalem to rule, and not long after merited the palm of martyrdom. Also of Saint Salome, who is read in the Gospel as solicitous about the Lord's burial. In the city of Osca, of the holy virgins Nunilo and Elodia, who for the confession of Christ, wasted by long custody and punished by capital sentence, celebrated their martyrdom.

## The tenth day before the Kalends · 23 October

[0609]

At Antioch of Syria, the birthday of Saint Theodoricus, presbyter, who, in the persecution of Julian the impious, after the punishment of the rack and many and most harsh tortures, also set aflame with lamps applied about his sides, when he persisted in the confession of Christ, consummated his martyrdom by the slaughter of the sword. In the Spains, of Saints Servandus and Germanus, who, after blows, the filth of prison, the injury of thirst and hunger, and the toil of a very long journey, at the last fulfilled the course of their martyrdom, their necks cut with the iron. Of whom Germanus at Emerita Servandus however at Seville was buried. In the city of Cologne, of Saint Severinus, bishop and confessor. In the district of Poitiers, of Saint Benedict, confessor.

## The ninth day before the Kalends · 24 October

[0613]

In Venusia, a city of Apulia, the birthday of the saints Felix, bishop, Audactus and Januarius, presbyters, Fortunatus and Septimus, readers, who in the times of Diocletian, long wasted with many chains and prisons in Africa and in Sicily, at length were consummated by the slaughter of the sword; Felix died a virgin in the fifty-sixth of his years. At the monastery Vertavum, of Saint Martin, abbot. [In Bouillart, in the margin: In Britain, of Saint Maglorius, bishop and confessor.]

## The eighth day before the Kalends · 25 October

[0617]

At Rome, the birthday of forty-six soldiers, who, baptized together by Dionisius the pope, soon at the command of the emperor Claudius were beheaded, and buried on the Salarian Way, where also one hundred and twenty-one other martyrs were laid: among whom there were four soldiers of Christ, Theodosius, Lucius, Mark and Peter. On the same day, in the city Petragoricas, of Saint Fronto, who, ordained bishop at Rome by blessed Peter, coming to the aforesaid city with Georgius the presbyter, whom through the apostle's staff he received back from death as companion on the journey, converted a great multitude of that people to Christ, and, famous for many miracles, rested in peace. At the city of Suessio, of Saints Crispinus and Crispinianus, who in the persecution of Diocletian, after monstrous torments inflicted on them, slaughtered with the sword, obtained the crown of martyrdom. In the city of Florence, the passion of blessed Miniatis, under the emperor Decius. Also in the city of Gavali, of Saint Hilary, bishop and confessor [nt: In the Dervensis codex the article closes with: *At the metropolis of Reims, of Saint Celsinus, confessor.* Bouillart.].

## The seventh day before the Kalends · 26 October

[0621]

At Africa, the birthday of the holy martyrs Rogatianus, presbyter, and Felicissimus, who in the persecution of Decius and Valerian were crowned with illustrious martyrdom, of whom also blessed Cyprian writes in the letter to the confessors, In the city of Narbonne, of Saint Rusticus, bishop and confessor.

## The sixth day before the Kalends · 27 October

[0625]

In the Spains, in the city of Abula, the passion of Saints Vincent, Sabina and Cristeta, who first were so stretched on the rack that all the joints of their limbs were loosened; then their heads, laid on stones, were crushed with strong bars even to the dashing out of the brain; and so they completed their martyrdom, the governor Dacianus conducting it. On the same day, at the fortress Tile, of Saint Florentius, martyr. [Bouillart adds in the margin: On the same day, the finding or translation of Saint Vincent, levite and martyr.]



## The fifth day before the Kalends · 28 October

[0629]

The birthday of the blessed apostles Simon the Cananaean and Thadeus, who is also called Judas; of whom Thadeus is related to have preached at Mesopotamia, but Simon at Egypt. Then, entering Persia together, when they had subjected an innumerable multitude of that people to Christ, they consummated their martyrdom. At Rome, of Saint Cirilla, daughter of Decius Caesar, who under the emperor Claudius had her throat cut for Christ and was slain with the sword. In the city of Meldis, of Saint Faro, bishop and confessor. At Paris, the translation of Saint Genevieve, virgin.

## The fourth day before the Kalends · 29 October

[0631]

At Jerusalem, the birthday of blessed Narcissus, bishop, whom ecclesiastical history relates to have been praiseworthy for holiness, patience and faith. On this same day, at the city of Sidon, of blessed Zenobius, presbyter, who under the bitterness of the latest persecution was crowned with martyrdom. In the province of Lucania, of the holy martyrs Jacinctus, Quintus, Felicianus and Lucius.

## The third day before the Kalends · 30 October

[0635]

At Africa, the birthday of the holy martyrs, two hundred and twenty in number. In the city *Tingitina*, the passion of Saint Marcellus, centurion, who consummated his martyrdom by the cutting off of the head under Agricolanus, acting as deputy of the praetorian prefects. At Antioch, of Saint Serapion, bishop, most illustrious in learning. [Bouillart adds in the text [nt: We confess that Lucanus was added on the edge of the codex. In Germanus, the first hand. Bouillart.]: On this same day, of Saint Germanus, bishop of Capua; and in the margin, in cursive type: And of Saint Lucanus, martyr.]

## The day before the Kalends · 31 October

[0637]

The vigil of All Saints. At Rome, the birthday of blessed Nemesius, deacon, and Lucilla his daughter, who, when they could in no way be turned from the faith of Christ, at the command of Valerian and Gallienus were beheaded, on the eighth day before the Kalends of September. Here, however, their solemnity is held more venerable, when by blessed Sixtus their bodies [0639] were more honourably entombed on the Appian Way. In the Gauls, in the town *Virmandensis*, of Saint Quintinus, who suffered martyrdom under the emperor Maximian, whose body, after fifty-five years, an angel revealing it, was found.

## NOVEMBER HAS 31 DAYS. [cj: *XXXI*; read *XXX*, "thirty"]

[0641]

## On the Kalends · 1 November

[0641]

The festival of the blessed Mother of God and of all the martyrs, which Pope Boniface instituted to be kept, celebrated and general, every year in the city of Rome. But also Gregory the pontiff afterwards decreed that the same be observed solemnly in honour of All Saints perpetually by the whole Church. At the fortress Divio, of Saint Benignus, presbyter, who, sent by blessed Policarpus to preach in Gaul, after he had been afflicted in manifold ways with most grievous torments by Count Terentius, at length it is ordered that his neck be pounded with an iron bar and his body pierced with a lance. In Campania, in the city of Terracina, of Saints Caesarius, deacon, and Julian, presbyter: which Caesarius, in the time of Claudius, was wasted in custody for many days, and afterwards, with the same Julian, put into a sack and so thrown headlong into the sea. In the city of Paris, the deposition of blessed Marcellus, confessor, by whose merits, that he might be shown a worthy future prelate, water is changed now into wine, now into balsam. Also of Saint Severinus, monk, from the city *Tiburtina*. And the birthday of Saint Mary, virgin, who, afflicted with dire lashes, harassed with the stretching of the rack and the tearing of the claws, consummated her martyrdom. Also in the city of Bajocas, of Saint Vigor, bishop. In the district *Vuastinensis*, of Saint Maturinus, confessor.

## The fourth day before the Nones · 2 November

[0645]

The birthday of blessed Victorinus, bishop *Pitabronensis*, who, after many teachings, as Saint Jerome testifies, was crowned with martyrdom in the persecution of Diocletian. At Rome, in the times of the emperor Hadrian, the passion of the blessed Eustachius, surnamed Placidus, and of his wife Theospis, with their sons Agapius and Theospis, whose wonderful acts are read. Their festival, though it is held on the Kalends, is here however kept more fully. At Laodicea, of Saint Theodotus, bishop, who was adorned not only with words, but also with deeds and virtues. On the same day, of Saint [0647] Ambrose, abbot of the monastery *Agaunensis*, who, famous for great virtues of life and holiness, rested in the Lord with a blessed end.

## The third day before the Nones · 3 November

[0651]

The birthday of Saint Quartus, disciple of the apostles. At Caesarea of Cappadocia, of the holy martyrs Germanus, Theophilus, Caesarius and Vitalis, who under the Decian persecution carried through their martyrdom most excellently. At Caesaraugusta, of innumerable holy martyrs, who under Dacianus, governor of the Spains, fell wonderfully for Christ.

## The day before the Nones · 4 November

[0655]

At Alexandria, of blessed Hierius, presbyter, who, nobly learned in the divine Scriptures, of most pure life, and bare and wholly unencumbered for the Christian philosophy, was an incomparable doctor of the Church; but he rested in the time of the emperor Philip. In the Gauls, in the city of Rotenus, of Saint Amantius, bishop, whose life was glorious in holiness and miracles. In the district *Vilcasinus*, of Saint Clarus, presbyter and martyr. At Augustudunum, of Saint Proculus, bishop.

## On the Nones · 5 November

[0659]

Of Zacharias the prophet, father of John the Baptist. In Terracina, a city of Campania, the birthday of Saints Felix, presbyter, and Eusebius, monk, in the time of the emperor Claudius; which Eusebius, when he had buried the holy martyrs Julian and Caesarius, and was converting many to the faith, whom Felix the presbyter baptized, both were seized and led to the judge's forum, and were not overcome; then shut up in prison, and in the same night, when they would not sacrifice, they were beheaded. In the territory of Orléans, of Saint Laetus, presbyter.

## The eighth day before the Ides · 6 November

[0661]

At Toniza of Africa, the birthday of Saint Felix. On whose solemnity blessed Augustine appears to expound a certain psalm to the people. In the East, in the city of Theopolis, of ten holy martyrs, who are read in the acts of the forty saints to have suffered under the Saracens. In Phrygia, of Saint Atticus. [Bouillart adds, at the edge of the text: In the district *Lemovicensis*, at Nobiliacum, the birthday of Saint Leonard, confessor.]

## The seventh day before the Ides · 7 November

[0665]

In Alexandria, of blessed Achillas, bishop, who was distinguished in learning, faith, way of life and morals. At Perusina, a city of Italy [nt: Here Sollerius stirs up much about Herculanus, whose eulogy he rightly holds is to be ascribed to Usuardus, all the most approved codices agreeing, both those written by hand and the printed; but because that eulogy is read not in the text of the Pratensis codex but in the margin, written in a more recent hand, hence arose in the sharp censor a doubt which is the author's hand, or, as he himself puts it, which hand is the autograph. This doubt he removes in such a way that he thinks neither the earlier nor the later hand is Usuardus's, and that whoever, laying aside partisanship, weighs this and the other faults of the Pratensis codex will so judge. I call all the learned to witness whether a very few things added in a more recent hand in the margin or in the empty space of a line (which is the one fault of the Pratensis codex, if indeed it is a fault) could incline anyone to doubt that a martyrology is the autograph which, both by its chronological marks and by the form of its letters, was plainly written in the ninth century and in Usuardus's age; which was composed in the abbey of Saint-Germain, and arranged for the use of the same abbey by a monk of the same abbey; which for three hundred years or more was read publicly in chapter; which has been most carefully preserved in a library never plundered, never burned, at least since the ninth century? What can be certain in this kind of learning, if this is not? Of the eulogy of Herculanus added on the edge of the codex, I have already explained in my letter how it happened that it was lacking in the autograph codex, and yet is found in all the copies. Bouillart.], the birthday of Saint Herculanus, bishop, whose body, after the cutting off of the head, was found on the fortieth day so united and sound, as blessed Gregory the pope writes, as if no incision of iron had touched it. On the same day, of blessed Amarantus, martyr, who, at the city *Albigensis*, having finished the course of the faithful contest, buried, lives in glory. In Frisia, the deposition of Saint Willibrord, bishop.

## The sixth day before the Ides · 8 November

[0669]

At Rome, on the Lavican Way, the passion of Saints Claudius, Nicostratus, Simpronianus, Castorius and Simplicius [nt: Those five martyrs lie on an erasure; and yet no copies differ from the Pratensis. I ask to whom the correction is to be ascribed. Bouillart.], who were first thrust into prison, then most grievously beaten with scorpions, but when they could not be changed from the faith of Christ, they were ordered by Diocletian to be thrown headlong into the middle of the sea. Also on the Lavican Way, the birthday of the four crowned ones, Severus, Severianus, Carpoforus and Victorinus, who at the command of Diocletian were beaten to death with blows of leaded scourges. Since their names could by no means be found, which, the Lord revealing them, were afterwards shown when years had intervened, it was established that their anniversary day should be kept under the names of the five martyrs above-mentioned.

## The fifth day before the Ides · 9 November

[0673]

At Amasia, a city of the *Marmaritani*, the birthday of Saint Theodore, martyr, who in the times of the emperors Maximian and Maximinus, for the confession of the Christian faith, was severely beaten and sent into prison; then, the Lord Saviour appearing to him and admonishing him to act constantly and manfully, he was relieved. At the last, after he had been hung upon the rack and gnawed with claws, so that his inward parts appeared bare, he is given over to burning fires. On the same day, in the city of Bourges, of Saint Ursicinus, confessor, who, ordained at Rome by the successors of the apostles, is appointed the first bishop to that same city.

## The fourth day before the Ides · 10 November

[0677]

The birthday of blessed Martin, pope, who, for the catholic faith, was seized from the Church by the heretical emperor Constantine, and brought to Constantinople, and banished to Cersona of the province of Licia, ended his life there, shining in the same place to this day with many signs of virtues. In the territory *Agatensis*, of the holy martyrs Tiberius, Modestus and Florentia, who in the time of Diocletian, tortured with various torments, completed their martyrdom. At Antioch, of Saints Demetrius, bishop, Anianus, deacon, Eustosius and twenty others.

## The third day before the Ides · 11 November

[0681]

In the Gauls, in the city of Tours, the birthday of blessed Martin, bishop and confessor, whose life was so glorious with miracles that he merited to be the raiser of three dead men. In Scithia, the metropolis of Phrygia Salutaria, the passion of Saint Menna, martyr, who, in the persecution of Diocletian, after he had striven to serve as a soldier to the heavenly King by a hidden way of life in the desert, coming forth into public and declaring himself a Christian with free voice, first tried with dire tortures, at the last, his knees fixed in prayer and giving thanks to the Lord Jesus Christ, was slain with the sword. Also at Lyon, of Saint Veranus, bishop, whose life was illustrious for the merits of faith and virtues.

## The day before the Ides · 12 November

[0685A]

At the province of Tarragona, in the city of Tirassona, of blessed Emilianus, presbyter and confessor, whose admirable life Braulio, bishop of Caesaraugusta, described in simple speech. In the city of Cologne, the deposition of Saint Cunibertus, bishop. In the territory *Senonicus*, of Saint Paternus, martyr. At the castle Milidunum, of Saint Leonius, confessor.

## On the Ides · 13 November

[0689]

At Ravenna, the birthday of the holy martyrs Valentinus, Solutor and Victor. In the Province, at the city Aquis, of blessed Mitrius, most illustrious martyr. In Africa, of the holy martyrs Archadius, Paschasius, Probus and Euticianus, who, when they would by no means bear to decline into the Arian perfidy, first proscribed, then driven into exile, then tortured with most atrocious punishments, at the last were slain by diverse deaths [Bouillart, at the edge of the page: At Paris, of Saint Gendulfus, bishop.]. At Tours, the deposition of Saint Briccius, bishop. [nt: So the Pratensis codex has it in this place. These three words, *Civitate Toleto sancti*, differ in nothing from the rest of the page. The first two syllables of the name *Eugenii* are of the same hand, but in blacker ink. The remaining letters of the same name and of *antistitis* are on an erasure, together with the first four letters of the word *Malbodio*. The rest is sound. I suspect, however, that the original letters were washed over with new ink lest they fade away. The conjecture is confirmed by the last two syllables of the word *Aldegundis*, and the whole word *virginis*, which, because they were not renewed in the same way, are beginning to strike the eyes less and less. Bouillart.] In the city of Toledo, of Saint Eugenius, bishop and confessor. [Bouillart: of Saint Eugenius, prelate. At the monastery Malbodium, of Saint Aldegundis, virgin.]



## The eighteenth day before the Kalends · 14 November

[0693]

At Thrace, in the city of Eraclea, the birthday of the holy martyrs Clementinus, Theodotus, and Philominus. At Alexandria, of Saint Serapion, whom the persecutors under the emperor Decius afflicted with most cruel punishments, so that, first loosening all the joints of his limbs, they cast him headlong from the heights, and so he was made a martyr of Christ.

## The seventeenth day before the Kalends · 15 November

[0695]

At Nola, a city of Campania, the birthday of blessed Felix, bishop, who from the fifteenth year of his age was distinguished by the glory of miracles, and under the governor Martianus completed his martyrdom with thirty others. On this same day, of Saint Eugenius, who, at the district of Paris, the course of martyrdom being consummated, received from the Lord the crown of a blessed passion. [*In Bouillart, in the margin:* On the same day, of Saint Macutus, bishop and confessor. At the monastery of Saint Germanus, the dedication of the church in honour of Saint John the Baptist, and of Saint John the apostle and evangelist, and of Saint Martialis; of the holy martyrs Laurence, Sebastian, Christopher, and also of the holy confessors Martin, Gregory, Benedict, and of Saint Mary Magdalene.]

## The sixteenth day before the Kalends · 16 November

[0699]

At Lyon, the birthday of Saint Eucherius, confessor, who, from the most noble order of senators, converted to the religious life and habit, long shut up of his own will within the enclosure of a cave, served Christ afterwards, at the aforesaid city, an angel revealing it, was solemnly set in the pontifical chair.

## The fifteenth day before the Kalends · 17 November

[0703]

At Alexandria, of blessed Dionisius, bishop. This man, often quite illustrious in many confessions, and being magnificent for the diversity of passions and torments, rested in the times of the emperors Valerian and Gallienus. In the city of Cordoba, the passion of the holy martyrs Acisclus and Victoria, where, in commendation of their precious death, on the same day roses sprung up by divine power are gathered. At Orléans, of Saint Anianus, bishop and confessor whose death, precious in the sight of the Lord, frequent miracles attest.

## The fourteenth day before the Kalends · 18 November

[0707]

At Antioch, the birthday of blessed Romanus, who, in the times of Diocletian, when a certain prefect was trying to break into the church and to overturn it from its foundations, exhorted the other Christians to oppose him; whence, together with a certain little child named Barala, he was crowned with a celebrated martyrdom. Also in the same city, of Saint Esichius, who, being a soldier, and having heard the command that whoever did not sacrifice to idols should lay down the belt of military service, at once loosed his belt. For this cause, a huge stone being bound to his right hand, he was ordered to be cast headlong into the river.

## The thirteenth day before the Kalends · 19 November

[0711]

At Rome, on the Appian Way, the birthday of Saint Maximus, presbyter and martyr, who, having suffered in the persecution of Maximian, was laid at Saint Sixtus. On the same day, of Saint Crispinus, bishop, who in the city *Astiagensis*, his head being cut off, obtained the glory of martyrdom. At Vienne, of the holy martyrs Severus, Exuperius and Felicianus, whose bodies, after many courses of years, found by their own revelation, and raised with honour by the bishop of the city, the clergy and the people, were also laid up with fitting honour. Also of Saint Faustus, deacon, this man, very aged and full of days, persevering as a confessor, his martyrdom perfected, was consummated by the cutting off of the head. [*In Bouillart, in the text, in cursive type:* At Tours, of Saint Oddo, abbot; *and at the edge of the page:* At Paris, the dedication of the church in honour of the holy cross and of the holy Mother of God, Mary, and of the holy martyrs Stephen, Vincent, and of the holy confessor Germanus.]

## The twelfth day before the Kalends · 20 November

[0715]

At Rome, the birthday of blessed Pontianus, pope, who, when Maximinus stirred up a persecution against the priests of the churches, was deported to Sardinia with Ypolitus the presbyter, and, slain with cudgels everywhere, consummated his martyrdom. His body was brought back by blessed Fabian the pope, and buried in the cemetery of Calixtus. At Cabilone, of Saint Silvester, bishop and confessor. This man, in the forty-second year of his priesthood, full of days and of virtues, passed to the Lord. At Sicily, in the city of Messana, of Saints Ampeli and Gaius. On this same day, in the city of Turin, of Octavius, Solutor and Adventor.

## The eleventh day before the Kalends · 21 November

[0719]

The birthday of the most blessed Rufus, of whom the apostle Paul writes to the Romans. In Italy, at the monastery Bobium, the deposition of Saint Columbanus, abbot; who was the founder of many monasteries and the father of innumerable monks, and, illustrious with many virtues, rested in a good old age. Also in Histria, the passion of Saint Maurus, martyr. [*Bouillart:* The birthday of the most blessed Rufus, of whom the apostle Paul writes to the Romans. [nt: Here Sollerius first notes on his own account that the Pratensis codex *on this day and the two following departs from the pure, nay from almost all the codices*. I, who on the following day saw no erasure in the codex, no other hand, no other ink, at once wondered, turned the leaf, ran through Sollerius's text, eager to know what the censor charged as a fault to the Pratensis. Nothing different from the Pratensis. But what was my state of mind when I read this immediately after the text: *Wholly pure are the Pratensis, Heriniensis, etc.* I confess I could scarcely hold back my laughter. I go on to read the various readings of this 21st day: *All things there must be in the greatest disorder, since Castellanus testifies that at* XXII *it treats of Caecilia alone: further, that at* XXIII *the whole text is again struck out, etc. Then of Columbanus, etc.; at* XXIV *a different hand is observed; whence it could almost be conjectured that it is altogether the same one which on the* XIX, XXI, XXII *and* XXIII *of this month runs riot through all the texts*. The reader believes that these things are said in earnest, and begins to fear for the Pratensis codex from that testimony of Castellanus. Let him, I pray, cast his eyes on the other page opposite; he will be freed of all fear. *I*, says Sollerius, *did not think that in the Auctaria, on this and the two following days, reliance was to be placed on Castellanus's latest testimony.* A splendid censure? Let us see the rest. First Sollerius is vexed that Mary *Neocorensis* was added here: yet with no argument that the death of the holy virgin is to be recorded on the 1st day of this month rather than on this day. Next he affirms that Columbanus was commemorated here by Usuardus. I confess it would have been better to leave Columbanus in the place where he had first announced him. For, on the testimony of Jonas, author of his Life, that holy abbot died on this day. But Usuardus put more faith than in Ado in the Kalendar which was drawn up in the time of Louis the Pious for certain churches of the Gauls which wished to embrace the Roman rite prescribed by Charlemagne; perhaps too he came upon the Gellone Martyrology, which itself also commemorates Saint Columbanus not on this day but on the 23rd of this month. Demetrius and Honorius are taken from the Hieronymian lists, which add eleven others, at least in our very ancient codex. Bouillart.] At the city *Neocorensis*, of Saint Mary, virgin, who suffered under the emperors Hadrian and Antoninus. In the province of Histria, the passion of Saint Maurus, martyr. In the city of Ostia, of the holy martyrs Demetrius and Honorius.]

## The tenth day before the Kalends · 22 November

[0723]

At Rome, the birthday of Saint Cecilia, virgin, who thoroughly taught her betrothed Valerianus and his brother Tiburtius to believe in Christ and to martyrdom, and afterwards was herself martyred, overcoming fire indeed, but slain by the sword. She suffered, moreover, in the times of the emperors Marcus Aurelius and Commodus. Also at Rome, of Saint Maurus, martyr, who contended under the prefect Celerinus. At Augustudunum, of Saint Pragmatius, bishop.

## The ninth day before the Kalends · 23 November

[0725]

The birthday of Saint Clement, bishop, who, fourth from blessed Peter the apostle, held the pontificate of the Roman Church, and, under the persecution of Trajan cast headlong into the sea, is crowned with martyrdom. On the same day, of Saint Felicitas, mother of seven martyred sons, who at the command of Antoninus was beheaded for Christ. [*Bouillart inserts:* [nt: Sollerius contends that Columbanus was not commemorated by Usuardus today. The arguments are two. The first he draws from the authority of Ado, who, he is certain, made mention of Columbanus the day before yesterday. The other is the day of Columbanus's death, which Jonas, the writer of his Life, testifies was the 21st of this month. I have said already, and not once only, that whether Usuardus erred or not is nothing to our purpose, and that a work cannot be taken away from its author on account of certain errors: yet I judge that last argument so bad that for Sollerius's sake I could wish it good. About that article I do not know what Chamillart advised Sollerius, but in the Auctaria I see that he read otherwise than Castellanus read. *Which I certainly do not understand*, says Sollerius, *unless a new interpolation has come in since the time of Sirmond*. I would avenge so atrocious an accusation, were I not angry. Bouillart.] In Italy, of blessed Columbanus, abbot, founder of many monasteries]. In the district *Hasbanius*, of Saint Trudo, presbyter and confessor. At Paris, the deposition of blessed Severinus, monk and solitary. In the city of Emerita, of Saint Lucretia, virgin.

## The eighth day before the Kalends · 24 November

[0729]

At Rome, the birthday of blessed Chrisogonus, martyr, who, after long chains and prisons, endured for the most constant confession of Christ, at the command of Diocletian was beheaded and thrown into the sea, and consummated his martyrdom. Also at Rome. of Saint Crescentianus, martyr, who is read of in the passion of blessed Marcellus the pope. At the fortress Blavia, of Saint Romanus, presbyter and confessor, the proclamation of whose holiness the glory of miracles declares. In the city of Cordoba, of the holy virgins Flora and Mary, who after long imprisonments were slain with the sword for Christ. At Perusia, a city of Tuscia, of Saint Felicissimus.

## The seventh day before the Kalends · 25 November

[0733]

The birthday of blessed Peter, bishop of Alexandria, who, being adorned with all virtues, in the divine Scriptures also inferior to none of those before him, both priest and victim of God, is suddenly seized, and by the order of Maximinus is cut off by the head. With whom at the same time many other bishops from Egypt are also slaughtered, about, with clerics and laymen, six hundred and sixty. Also at Antioch, of Saint Erasmus, martyr. [*Bouillart, at the edge of the page:* At Alexandria, the passion of Saint Catherine, virgin and martyr.]

## The sixth day before the Kalends · 26 November

[0737]

The birthday of blessed Linus, pope, who, first after Peter, held the Roman Church for twelve years, and, crowned with martyrdom, was buried in the Vatican. At Alexandria, of the holy martyrs Faustus, presbyter, Dius and Ammonius, who, with blessed Peter, bishop of the same city, at the command of Maximinus were slaughtered. At Augustudunum, of Saint Amator, bishop.

## The fifth day before the Kalends · 27 November

[0741]

At the city *Bononiensis*, the birthday of the holy martyrs Agricola and Vitalis, of whom the latter was before the former's slave, now his partner and colleague in martyrdom. Then, when the same was being forced by the persecutors to deny Christ, and he professed the Lord Jesus Christ the more, they exercised every kind of torment upon him. Last of all they slew blessed Agricola, fastening him to a cross. In the Gauls, in the city *Regensis*, of Saint Maximus, confessor, who, endowed from his earliest age with the grace of all virtues, first Father of the monastery *Lirinensis*, then bishop of the Church *Regensis*, stood out renowned for signs and prodigies.

## The fourth day before the Kalends · 28 November

[0743]

At Corinth, the birthday of blessed Sostenes, disciple of Saint Paul, whom the same Apostle mentions, writing to the Corinthians. On the same day, at Africa, of the holy martyrs Papinius and Mansuetus, bishops, who, [0745] in the time of the Vandal persecution, for the defence of the Catholic faith, burned over their whole body with glowing plates of iron, consummated a glorious contest. At Rome, of Saint Rufus, whom Diocletian, having punished him with all his household, made a martyr to Christ.

## The third day before the Kalends · 29 November

[0747]

The vigil of Saint Andrew the apostle. At Rome, on the Salarian Way, the birthday of Saint Saturninus, martyr, and of Sisinnius, deacon, under the emperor Maximian, whom, long wasted in prison, the prefect of the City ordered to be raised upon the rack, and stretched with sinews, and beaten with cudgels and scorpions. Then he ordered flames to be applied to their sides, and, taken down from the rack, their heads to be cut off. On the same day, at Toulouse, of blessed Saturninus, bishop, who, held by the pagans in the Capitol of the same city, and cast headlong from the highest summit of the Capitol down all the steps, his head crushed, his brain dashed out and his whole body torn apart, breathed out a soul worthy of Christ.

## The day before the Kalends · 30 November

[0751]

In the city of Patras, of the province of Achaia, the birthday of Saint Andrew the apostle, who also preached at Scithia. This most blessed man, seized by the proconsul Egea, was first shut up in prison, and then most grievously beaten, but at the last hung upon a cross, survived there two days. At Sanctonas, of Saint Trojanus, bishop, a man of great holiness, who, buried in the earth, shows by many virtues that he lives in heaven.



## DECEMBER HAS 31 DAYS.

[0755]

## On the Kalends · 1 December

[0755]

At Rome, the birthday of the holy martyrs Crisantus and Daria, virgin, who, after many passions which they had won for Christ, were ordered by the emperor Numerian to be put down into a sand-pit on the Salarian Way, and there, living, to be overwhelmed with earth and stones. Also at Rome, of the holy martyrs Diodorus, presbyter, and Marianus, deacon, with many others, who at the command of the aforesaid emperor celebrated the glory of martyrdom. At the city of Mainz, the birthday of blessed Albanus, martyr. Also in the city of Noyon, of Saint Eligius, bishop and confessor, whose admirable life a manifold number of signs commends. On this same day, of Saint Nathalia, wife of Saint Adrianus, martyr. In the city of Narni, of Saint Proculus, presbyter.

## The fourth day before the Nones · 2 December

[0759]

The birthday of Saints Verus and Securus, brothers, who were crowned with martyrdom at Africa. At Rome, the passion of Saint Viviana, martyr, who, at the command of Julian the sacrilegious emperor, was beaten with leaded scourges so long, until she gave back her spirit.

## The third day before the Nones · 3 December

[0761]

At Rome, the birthday of the holy martyrs Claudius, a tribune, and his wife Hilaria, and their sons Jason and Maurus, with seventy soldiers, of whom the emperor Numerian ordered Claudius, bound to a huge stone, to be given headlong into the middle of the sea, but the soldiers and the sons of Claudius himself to be punished by capital sentence. At Tingis, the metropolis, the passion of Saint Cassianus, who, long discharging the office of a recorder, at length inspired from heaven, held it execrable to serve, bloodstained, the slaughter of Christians; whence, renouncing that same office, under the Christian confession he merited to obtain the triumph of martyrdom.

## The day before the Nones · 4 December

[0765]

At Pontus, of blessed Meletius, bishop and confessor, who, though he was magnificent by the prerogative of learning, yet the virtue of his mind and the sincerity of his life stood out far more magnificent in him. Also, at Alexandria, of Saint Clement, presbyter, who flourished as greatly as could be in the schools of divine learning. [*Bouillart adds, in the text:* In the district of Bourges, of Saint Syranus [nt: The commemoration of Syranus is in the first hand, with no erasure, added nonetheless, but by Usuardus. That Syranus, or Sigirannus, is well known. Labbe in his Bibliotheca and Mabillon in the Benedictine Acts have made his deeds public. Bouillart.], abbot. *And in the margin:* At the monastery Floriacum, the translation of the most holy confessor of Christ, Benedict, abbot.]

## On the Nones · 5 December

[0769]

In Africa, at the colony *Thebestina*, the birthday of Saint Crispina, martyr, who, in the times of Diocletian and Maximian, when she would not sacrifice, was beheaded by order of the proconsul Anolinus. On the same day, in Italy, of Saint Dalmacius, martyr. In the city of Trier, of Saint Nicecius, bishop, a man of all holiness. Also in the city of Thagora, of Saints Julius and Potamia.

## The eighth day before the Ides · 6 December

[0771]

The birthday of blessed Nicholas, bishop of Myra in Lycia, of whom, among many marks of miracles, this memorable thing is related: that, being set far off, he turned the emperor Constantine from the destruction of certain men to mercy, both by admonitions through a vision and by threats. In Africa, of Saints Dionisia, Dativa, Leontia, and a religious man named Tertius, and Emilianus and Boniface, with three others, who all, for the confession of the Catholic faith, tortured with most grievous, in innumerable, punishments, merited to be joined to the number of the confessors of Christ.

## The seventh day before the Ides · 7 December

[0775]

At Alexandria, the birthday of blessed Agatho, martyr, under the emperor Decius, who, when he was a soldier and prevented certain people who wished to mock the dead corpses of the martyrs, a clamour of the whole populace is suddenly raised against him. Offered, moreover, to the judge, when he persisted in the confession, he was condemned to the loss of his head for piety. In the city Sanctonas, of Saint Martin, abbot, at whose tomb miracles very frequently come to pass by divine power. In the district *Meldicensis*, of Saint Fara, virgin.

## The sixth day before the Ides · 8 December

[0777]

At Rome, the birthday of blessed Euticianus, pope, who ruled the Church one year, and under Aurelian was crowned with martyrdom, buried in the cemetery of Calistus, who also himself buried with his own hand, in various places, three hundred and forty-two martyrs. On this same day, at Alexandria, of Saint Macharius, martyr, who, in the time of Decius, when he was being urged by the judge [0779A] with many words to deny, and with so much the greater constancy professed his faith, is at the last ordered to be burned alive. [*Bouillart, at the edge of the page:* The Conception of the most blessed Mother of God, the Virgin Mary.]

## The fifth day before the Ides · 9 December

[0781]

The birthday of Saint Leochadia, virgin, who, by the prefect of the Spains Dacianus, at Toledo, worn out by the harsh [*Bouillart,* [0783] *dira*] custody of prison [nt: At this place a leaf has been torn out of the codex. But he who restored it, because he used larger letters, left this article unfinished and cut short by more than half. What was lacking Sollerius supplied from the Pratensis codex B. I praise the deed and imitate it. Bouillart.], when she had heard of the most grievous tortures of blessed Eulalia and of the rest of the martyrs, with her knees set in prayer, gave back to Christ an undefiled spirit. On this same day, of Saint Cyprian, abbot of Périgueux, a man of magnificent holiness and most renowned in miracles.

## The fourth day before the Ides · 10 December

[0785]

At the city *Hispolitana*, of the holy martyrs Carpoforus, presbyter, and Abundius, deacon, who, in the persecution of Diocletian, first beaten most cruelly with cudgels then thrust back into prison with food and drink denied them, again tortured on the rack, and after this long wasted in prison, were at last struck with the sword. In Spain, in the city of Emerita, the passion of Saint Eulalia, virgin, who, when she was thirteen years old, for the confession of Christ, by order of the governor Dacianus, suffered very many torments, at last hung upon the rack and torn with hooks, burning torches being applied on either side, drawing in the fire gave back her spirit. On the same day, at the aforesaid city, of Saint Julia, martyr, who was a fellow virgin of Saint Eulalia and an inseparable companion to her as she hastened to the passion.

## The third day before the Ides · 11 December

[0789]

At Rome, the birthday of blessed Damasus, pope, and the passion of Saint Traso, martyr, who, since he was most Christian, was seized at the command of Maximinus, and with two others, Pontianus and Praetextatus, crowned with martyrdom. In the city of Amiens, of the holy martyrs Victoricus and Fuscianus. Into the nostrils and ears of these the judge ordered iron spikes to be driven, and their heads to be pierced through with red-hot nails, then their eyes to be torn out, and last of all to shoot through their bodies; and so, together with Saint Gentianus their host, their heads cut off, they passed to the Lord. In the Spains, of Saint Euticius [nt: Eutychius was left out in the Dervensis codex. Bouillart.], whose acts are extant.

## The day before the Ides · 12 December

[0793]

At Narbonne, the birthday of Saint Paul, confessor, whom blessed Paul the apostle, having ordained him, appointed as bishop to that same city: and who, going with the same Apostle to the Spains for the sake of preaching, was left there, where, the office of preaching not slothfully fulfilled, illustrious for miracles, crowned, he rested. In Alexandria, of the holy martyrs Epimachius and Alexander, who, when they had been a long time in chains, and, worn out by various punishments, had persevered in the faith, are ordered at the last to be consumed by fires. Also at Alexandria, of the holy women Ammonaria and Mercuria, with two others, who, having endured and overcome unheard-of kinds of torments, receive the end of all, the sword striking. Also of the holy martyrs Hermogenes, Donatus and twenty-two others. In the district *Vinnacensis*, of Saint Walericus, presbyter and confessor.

## On the Ides · 13 December

[0797]

At Syracuse, a city of Sicily, the birthday of Saint Lucy, virgin and martyr, under the persecution of Diocletian, whom, when the panders wished, at the command of Paschasius the consular, to corrupt her, they could by no means move, nor with ropes added, or with very many yoke of oxen. Pitch, resin, boiling oil she received, harmed in nothing, but at length, a sword plunged into her vitals, she was struck. On this same day, of Saint Autbertus, bishop of Cambrai.

## The nineteenth day before the Kalends · 14 December

[0801]

At Cyprus, the birthday of blessed Spiridion, bishop, who was one of those confessors whom Maximian, their right eyes dug out and the left ham cut, had condemned to the mines; and who, since he led a prophetic life, was also renowned for the glory of signs. At Alexandria, of the holy martyrs Hero, Arsenius, Isidore and Dioscorus, a boy, whom the judge, under the Decian persecution, tearing them with various torments, when he saw them armed alike with the constancy of faith, orders to be given to the fires. But Dioscorus, scourged in many ways. by the divine will was released for the consolation of the faithful. In Antioch, the birthday of the holy martyrs Drusus, Zosimus, and Theodorus. Also at Reims, the passion of Saint Nicasius, bishop, and of Eutropia, virgin, his sister.

## The eighteenth day before the Kalends · 15 December

[0803]

At Africa, of blessed Valerianus, bishop and confessor, who, when he was more than eighty years old, was ordered to be driven out of the city alone, and it was so commanded that no one should let him dwell, neither in a house nor in a field; and thus, lying a long time naked under the open air on the public road, in the confession of Catholic truth and the defence of holiness, he completed the course of a blessed life. In the territory of Orléans, of Saint Maximinus, confessor.

## The seventeenth day before the Kalends · 16 December

[0807]

Of the three children, Ananias, Azarias and Misael, whose bodies are laid at Babylon under a certain cave. In Tuscia, the passion of Saint Barbara, virgin, under the emperor Maximian. She, after the dire wasting of prison and the cutting of the sinews, and the burning of lamps, and the cutting off of the breasts, and the torture of other torments, given at the last to the sword, consummated her martyrdom. At Ravenna, of Saints Valentinus. Naulis and Agricola.

## The sixteenth day before the Kalends · 17 December

[0809]

The translation of Saint Ignatius, bishop and martyr, who, brought from the city of Rome to Antioch, lies outside the gate *Damnitica*, in the cemetery of the church. On the same day, of blessed Lazarus, whom the Lord Jesus is read in the Gospel to have raised from the dead. Also of blessed Martha, his sister, whose venerable memory a church built not far from Bethany, where close by was their house, preserves. In the East, at the city of Eleutheropolis, of fifty holy martyrs, who suffered under the Saracens.



## The fifteenth day before the Kalends · 18 December

[0813]

At Macedonia, in the city of Philippi, the birthday of the blessed martyrs Rufus and Zosimus. These were of the number of the disciples through whom the primitive Church was founded among the Jews and the Greeks, of whose happy contest also Saint Policarpus writes in the epistle to the Philippians. In Africa, the passion of Saint Moyses, martyr, At Tours, of Saint Gatianus, bishop and confessor, who, sent from the city of Rome to that same city as its first bishop, illustrious for many miracles, rested in peace.

## The fourteenth day before the Kalends · 19 December

[0817]

At Egypt, of blessed Nemesius, martyr, who, tortured with redoubled punishments by the judge Emilianus, was ordered to be burned with robbers, bearing the likeness of the Saviour, who together with robbers endured the cross. In the city of Nicaea, of Saint Darius, martyr. Also at Auxerre, of Saint Gregory, bishop.

## The thirteenth day before the Kalends · 20 December

[0819]

At Alexandria, of the most blessed martyrs Ammon, Zeno, Ptolomeus, Ingenius and Theophilus, who, standing by the tribunals, when a certain Christian set in the punishments was trembling, and was now almost inclining to deny, were trying with face, eyes and nods to raise him up. And when for this cause the clamour of the whole populace leapt out against them, bursting forth into the midst, they testify that they are Christians. Through whose victory Christ at once most gloriously triumphed, and gave constancy of mind to his own. In Thrace, in the city of Gelduba, of Saint Julius, martyr. Also in Amphitrea, of Saint Liberatus.

## The twelfth day before the Kalends · 21 December

[0823]

The birthday of blessed Thomas the apostle, who, preaching the Gospel to the Parthians and Medes, suffered in India, and not long after was translated thence to the city of Edessa. On the same day, in Tuscia, of Saints John and Festus.

## The eleventh day before the Kalends · 22 December

[0825]

At Rome on the Lavican Way between the Two Laurels, the birthday of thirty martyrs, who all on one day, in the persecution of Diocletian, were crowned. At Alexandria, of blessed Ischyrion, martyr. He, when he was being forced to sacrifice by blandishments and injuries, and despised them; pierced through the vitals with a sharpened stake, is handed over to death. In the city of Ostia, of Saints Demetrius, Honoratus and Florus. [*Bouillart:* [nt: I confess that Basileus was not well announced here by Usuardus. For if he followed the Hieronymian lists, he ought to have written: *In the city of Ostia, of Saints Demetrius, Honoratus* (for of Florus there is no mention in our very old codex); or if he had a mind to commemorate Basileus, it was not *Ostia* but *Antioch* that ought to have been assigned as the city. As I sought the cause of this error, the 21st day of November came back to my mind, where I had read: *In the city of Ostia, of the holy martyrs Demetrius and Honorius*. At once I unrolled our codex of the Hieronymian Martyrology, which comes nearest to the age of Usuardus, and which is likely to have been copied from the one which Usuardus consulted in writing his own. There on both days, that is 21 November and 22 December, I see the same saints recorded in the same lines, at Ostia Saints Demetrius and Honorius, at Antioch Saint Basileus, with this one difference, that on 22 December *Honoratus* is read for *Honorius*. For my part I conjecture that the error flowed from that likeness of saints and cities. Perhaps Usuardus had closed his article with the commemoration of Saints Demetrius and Honoratus. Afterwards, recalling that the same saints had been recorded on the 21st day of November, suspecting a scribe's fault he deleted what he had written (for Castellanus falsely advised that there is no erasure), put Saint Basileus in their place, and by a slip of memory wrote *Ostia* for *Antioch*. However that may be, the Pratensis codex loses no authority from it, and it will be held in place of the autograph so long as there are those who prefer to draw from the source rather than to chase after the streams. Bouillart.] In the city of Ostia, of Saint Basileus.]

## The tenth day before the Kalends · 23 December

[0829]

At Nicomedia, of twenty holy martyrs, whom the Diocletianic persecution, tortured with most grievous torments, made martyrs to Christ, and joined them, blessed, to the number of the saints in the heavens. At Rome, the birthday of Saint Victoria, virgin, under the persecution of the emperor Decius, who, when she was betrothed to a certain pagan, and would neither marry nor sacrifice, after many miracles done, among which she had gathered very many virgins, was struck with the sword in the heart by the executioner, at the request of her betrothed. Also at Rome, of Saint Servulus, of whom blessed Gregory writes that from his earliest age to the end of his life he lay paralysed; at whose tomb miracles very frequently come to pass. At Paris, the dedication of the Basilica in honour of the holy cross and of Saint Vincent, martyr, and the deposition of the lord Childebert, the king.

## The ninth day before the Kalends [nt: (Here, in Bouillart's edition, the year begins.)] · 24 December

[0833]

The vigil [nt: All the manuscripts of the Prés, one excepted, begin the year here according to the ancient custom in use in the age of our Usuardus, and countless others follow them. Sollerius's Martyrology, however, takes its beginning from the Circumcision of the Lord, that is, from the Kalends of January. Bouillart.] of the birthday of the Lord. At Antioch of Syria, the birthday of forty holy virgins, who under the Decian persecution consummated martyrdom through various torments. At Spoleto, a city of Tuscia, of Saint Gregory, martyr and presbyter, in the times of the emperors Diocletian and Maximian, who, first beaten with knotted cudgels, and then, after the gridiron and prison, struck on the knees with iron cards, but also set on fire along his sides with burning lamps, was at length beheaded. In the city of Tripoli, of Saint Lucian.

## The eighth day before the Kalends · 25 December

[0835]

JESUS CHRIST THE SON OF GOD IS BORN in BETHLEHEM OF JUDAH in the forty-second year of Caesar Augustus [*Bouillart inserts:* [nt: It does not please Sollerius that the Usuardine Pratensis codex, with some others, reads between *in the year of Caesar Augustus* XLII and *of the olympiad* CXCIII, *in the week, according to the prophecy of Daniel*, LXVI. He does not think these words belong to the text, because they are not found at all in five codices which in this place he judges pure. But these codices are later in age than the Pratensis. Which is to be put before the other, the source before the stream, or the stream before the source? Why the other codices do not have them, I do not know. For there is no erasure here in the Pratensis. I suspect that they were first written by Usuardus; but that when he dictated the Martyrology to be offered to the king, he was alarmed by the variety of opinions on this matter and feared to hand down anything uncertain. Bouillart.] in the sixty-sixth week, according to the prophecy of Daniel.], of the one hundred and ninety-third olympiad. On the same day, the birthday of Saint Anastasia under the emperor Diocletian, who, for the confession of the Lord worn out by long custody, then carried with two hundred men and seven hundred women to the Palmarian islands, she herself indeed by fire, but the rest by various killings, celebrated martyrdom. At Rome, in the cemetery of Apronianus, the passion of blessed Eugenia, virgin, who in the time of the emperor Gallienus, after the marks of virtues, after the sacred choirs of virgins, long contending for Christ, at the last had her throat cut with the sword.

## The seventh day before the Kalends · 26 December

[0839]

At Jerusalem, the birthday of Saint Stephen the protomartyr, who was stoned by the Jews not long after the passion of Christ, namely in the same year as his Ascension. The venerable body of this man was found by divine revelation in the time of the emperor Honorius. At Rome, on the Appian Way, the deposition of Saint Dionisius, pope, who shone out illustrious for the teachings of the faith under the emperor Claudius. On the same day, of Saint Marinus, a most illustrious man, who obtained the triumph of martyrdom at Rome under the emperor Marcian.

## The sixth day before the Kalends · 27 December

[0843]

At Ephesus, the birthday of blessed John, apostle and evangelist, who, after the banishment of exile, after the revelation of the divine Apocalypse, after the writing of the Gospel, persevering until the times of the emperor Trajan, founded and ruled the churches of all Asia. And, worn out with old age, in the sixty-eighth year after the passion of the Lord, but of his own age the ninety-ninth, he died, and was buried near the same city. At Alexandria, of Saint Maximus, bishop: who was made quite illustrious and distinguished by the title of confession.

## The fifth day before the Kalends · 28 December

[0847]

At Bethlehem, the birthday of the holy Innocents, who were slain by King Herod. At Ancyra of Galatia, of Saints Euticus, presbyter, and Domitianus, deacon.

## The fourth day before the Kalends · 29 December

[0849]

At Jerusalem, of David the king. At Arles, the birthday of Saint Trophimus, whom Paul mentions, writing to Timothy, who, ordained bishop by the same Apostle, was sent as the first to the aforesaid city to preach the Gospel of Christ. From whose fountain, as Pope Zosimus writes, all Gaul received the streams of faith. In the district *Oximensis*, of Saint Ebrulfus, confessor. [*Bouillart adds:* [nt: Here Sollerius is surely to be wondered at, who, rejecting all the manuscript codices, even the ancient ones, clings to Molanus's edition alone. As if the Pratensis codex, by his own admission, if not the original, at least the most ancient, were not of greater authority. Nor does it matter that Saint Melania was added at the end of the article, since she is read in some codices, both those cited by him and in the Pratensis codices B, D, E and the Montisburg. Besides, this addition was written not by a strange hand but by the principal one; for what cause Usuardus commemorated Melania on this day is not known. Her feast day is commonly kept on the 31st. As regards Saint Thomas of Canterbury, whom the celebrated Castellanus, in that famous letter so often praised by Sollerius, asserts was written in a Gothic hand and added towards the end, that is wholly foreign to the truth. Of Saint Thomas there is not so much as a word in the Pratensis codex. Now from this let the reader who is zealous for the truth see how far Castellanus is to be believed in the rest. Bouillart.] Also at Jerusalem, of Saint Melania, consecrated to God.]

## The third day before the Kalends · 30 December

[0853]

At Spoleto, the birthday of blessed Sabinus, bishop, of Exuperantius and Marcellus, deacons, and of Venustianus with his wife and sons, under the emperor Maximian. Of whom Marcellus and Exuperantius, first hung upon the rack, then heavily wasted with cudgels, afterwards scraped with hooks, and roasted by the burning of their sides, completed their martyrdom. Venustianus, however, not long after, together with his wife and sons, was slain with the sword. But Saint Sabinus, after the cutting off of his hands and a long binding in prison, was beaten even to death. Their martyrdom, therefore, although it took place at different times, is nevertheless kept on one day. At Alexandria, of Saint Mansuetus, martyr, with ten others.

## The day before the Kalends · 31 December

[0857]

At Rome, the birthday of Saint Silvester, pope, whose illustrious acts are extant. At Senones, of blessed Sabinianus, bishop, and Potentianus, who, sent by the Roman pontiff to preach, made that same metropolis illustrious by the confession of their martyrdom. [nt: Sollerius contends that the Pratensis codex, with the Antuerp.-Maj. and the Rosweyd., goes too far, in that after *was cut down* they add *by order of the emperor Aurelian*. Who does not see that these words were written by the author himself, so that the time of Saint Columba's martyrdom might be shown more exactly? These words, *by order of the emperor Aurelian*, are indeed in an erased place, but written in the first hand. The same reading is had by the codices of the Prés B and D, the Colbert. B, the Victorin. B, the Conchensis, the Pontisar., the Sandionys. and the Montisburgensis. It is to be noted that in this same article these words, *who by the Roman pontiff to*, etc., lie on an erasure, of which there is no trace in the Dervensis codex, and which therefore had been made before the Martyrology was offered to Charles. There are therefore two erasures of different times in this article. I ask the learned to come and inspect whether the script is different. Bouillart.] And in the same city, of Saint Columba, virgin: who, having overcome the fire, was cut down with the sword [*Bouillart adds:* by order of the emperor Aurelian.] At Retiaria, of Saint Hermes, exorcist.

And at length the feasts close December, the last.

*TO THE GREATER GLORY OF GOD.*
