Martyrologium 1
by Usuard of Saint-Germain
Source text: Public Domain. English translation/apparatus/encoding: CC BY-NC 4.0, Wroot Press.
https://migne.app/pl/123/martyrologium-1/
----------------------------------------

HERE BEGINS THE MARTYROLOGY OF USUARDUS THROUGH THE CYCLE OF THE YEAR.

## PROLOGUE [nt: This prologue was lacking in the manuscript codex which we are making public, because its first leaf had fallen out through age. It was supplied to us, however, by the copy of the most distinguished man (V. C.) Pithou, of almost the same character both of script and of age, on the witness of Dom Jacques du Breul, a monk of this monastery, who prefixed this observation to the front of that Prologue. It is to be noted besides that it is not found in Sollerius's edition of Usuardus. Bouillart.] TO CHARLES THE BALD.

[0599A]To the most pious lord of kings, CHARLES, USUARDUS, an unworthy priest and monk: an everlasting crown in Christ.

It is by no means hidden from your Highness, O most wise prince, how we are admonished by the zeal of the ancients, worthy of imitation, that whatever in the acts, especially those agreeing with the doctrine of the Church, has been found less than perfect, we ought either to supply as far as we are able, or at least to desire that it be supplied. Which matter, with pious solicitude indeed (your command, if you remember, having been graciously applied), compelled me, though unworthy, to this: that I should gather into a certain unity, out of certain Martyrologies of the preceding Fathers, the sacred festivals of the saints which are to be recalled every year. And I recalled, in their very solemnities, [0599B] how many excesses of my own negligence, which I also desired to be purged by such an office. Besides, I was also provoked to this by the pious, though succinct, writings of the venerable presbyters, namely Jerome and Bede; of whom the former, studying brevity, and the latter, leaving very many days untouched, [0600A] are found to have passed over many things necessary to this work. Having followed them, however, I resolved also to follow the broader footsteps, already in this very undertaking, of Florus, a man worthy of memory, especially in the second book of the same. For there he both corrected and added many things which he had omitted in the first. But if anything, beyond what I received from them, has been done or changed in this work, it may be recognized that it was searched out by me with shrewd inquiry. For the rest, most kind one, I have preferred to insert this little preface of my littleness into this little work for this reason: that it might be known that I did not use levity in this endeavour, but rather obeyed your commands, as was fitting, which are wont to consult the benefit of the catholic faithful. Wherefore I beseech what is yours: that, if it be judged just, it may be strengthened by the proper anchor of your protection, namely that [0600B] it may be confirmed both for those present by the authority of royal examination, and for those to come by the examination of so great an authority. May the Lord, King of kings, deign to guard the excellence of your greatness with his power through many courses of years. Amen.

## ANOTHER PROLOGUE [nt: This second prologue is missing in the edition of Usuardus which Sollerius prepared; but it is found in almost all the handwritten codices of the same Usuardus which are kept in the library of the Prés, and in many others. Bouillart.], FROM THE BOOKS OF BLESSED AUGUSTUS [cj: *AUGUSTI*; read *AUGUSTINI*, "of Augustine"]. *How the saints are to be honoured.*

[0599]

[0599C]The ancient Fathers ordained that the festivals of the holy apostles or martyrs be celebrated in the mystery of veneration, either to stir up imitation, or that we may be associated with their merits and helped by their prayers [n: (AUG, l. XX, contr. Faust., c. 21)]. Yet in such a way that we sacrifice to none of the martyrs, but to the very God of the martyrs, although we set up altars in the memorials of the martyrs. For no one standing at the altar in the places of the holy bodies has ever said: We offer [0600C] to thee, Peter, or Paul, or Cyprian; but what is offered is offered to God, who crowned the martyrs: so that, from the love of those very places, the affection may rise up to increase charity, both toward those whom we are able to imitate, and toward him by whose help we may be able. We honour the martyrs, therefore, with that worship of love and fellowship with which holy men of God are also honoured in this life, whose heart we perceive to be prepared for such a passion for the truth of the gospel. But those the more devoutly, the more securely. [0601A] Whom we also proclaim with more confident praise as victors already in the happier life, than as still fighting in this one. But with that worship which in Greek is called *latria*, and in Latin cannot be said in one word, since it is a certain service properly owed to the Divinity, we neither honour anyone, nor teach that anyone is to be honoured, save the one God. And since the offering of sacrifice pertains to this worship, whence those are called idolaters who show this also to idols, in no way do we offer any such thing, or enjoin that it be offered, either to any martyr, or to any holy soul, or to any angel. And whoever slips into this error is rebuked by sound doctrine, either that he may be corrected, or that he may be condemned; since even the saints themselves, whether men or angels, do not wish [0602A] that to be shown to themselves which they know to be owed to the one God. This appeared in Paul and Barnabas, when the Lycaonians, moved by the miracles which were done through them, wished to sacrifice to them as to gods. For, having torn their garments, confessing and persuading them that they were not gods, they forbade these things to be done to them [n: (Act. XIV, 14)]. It appeared also in the angels, as also in the Apocalypse we read that an angel forbade himself to be adored, and said to his adorer: *I am thy fellow servant and of thy brethren; adore God [n: (Apoc. XIX, 10)]*. The martyrs, therefore, are to be honoured for imitation, not adored for religion. They are to be honoured with charity, not with servitude.

## JANUARY HAS 31 DAYS.

[0601]

## On the Kalends · 1 January

[0601]

The Circumcision of our Lord Jesus Christ. At Rome, the birthday of Saint Almachius, martyr; who, at the command of the prefect of the City, when he said: Today are the Octaves of the Lord's day; cease from the superstitions of idols [sic: *idorum*], was slain by the gladiators. On the Appian Way, the crowns of thirty soldiers, under the emperor Diocletian. Also at Rome, of Saint Martina, virgin, who, under the emperor Alexander, tormented with divers kinds of torments, at length obtained the palm of martyrdom by the sword. At Spoleto, of Saint Concordius, presbyter, and martyr, in the times of the emperor Antoninus; who, first beaten with cudgels, then hung upon the rack, and afterwards wasted with iron in prison, and there consoled by an angelic visitation, finally ended his life by the sword. In Caesarea of Cappadocia, the deposition of Saint Basil, bishop, whose feast is chiefly kept on the eighteenth day before the Kalends of July. In Africa, of blessed Fulgentius, bishop of the church of Ruspe, who, banished into exile on account of the catholic faith and his eminent doctrine, and at length permitted to return to his own church, renowned in life and word, rested in a holy end. In the territory of Lyon, of Saint Eugendus [Bouillart: *Augendi*], abbot, whose life shone forth full of virtues and miracles. At Alexandria, of Saint Eufrosina, virgin.

## The fourth day before the Nones · 2 January

[0605]

At Antioch, the passion of blessed Isidore, bishop. And in Pontus, in the city of Thomis, of three brothers, Argeus, Marcellus [0607] [Bouillart: *Narcissi*] and Marcellinus, a boy, who under the emperor Licinius, being seized among the recruits, when he would not serve as a soldier, was beaten to death, and, long wasted in prison, completed his martyrdom. In the Thebaid, of Saint Macharius, abbot.

## The third day before the Nones · 3 January

[0609]

At Rome on the Appian Way, the birthday of blessed Antheros, pope [nt: The Pratensis codex omits the word 'papae', says Sollerius, and reads 'cimiterio Calixti'. That on both counts he was misled by his informant, the text here given by us proves. Bouillart.], who, when he had ruled the Church twelve years, suffered under Maximian, and was buried in the cemetery of Calixtus. On the same day, of Saint Peter, who at the city of Aulana was slain by the punishment of the cross. In the Hellespont, of the holy martyrs Cyricus, Primus and Theogenes. In the city of Paris, of Saint Genevieve, virgin, who, dedicated to Christ by blessed Germanus, bishop of Auxerre, shone widely with admirable virtues and miracles.

## The day before the Nones · 4 January

[0613]

The birthday of blessed Titus, who, ordained bishop of the Cretans by the apostle Paul, and most faithfully fulfilling the office of preaching, obtained a blessed end, and was buried there at the church where he had been appointed a worthy minister. At Africa, of the most illustrious martyrs Aquilinus, Geminus, Eugenti, Martianus, Quintus, Theodotus, Triphon, whose acts are extant. At Rome, of the saints Priscus, presbyter, and Priscillianus, cleric, and Benedicta, a religious woman; who in the time of the emperor Julian completed their martyrdom by the sword. Also at Rome, of Saint Dafrosa, wife of Fabian the martyr, who after his slaying, first banished into exile, then by the aforesaid emperor was ordered to be punished by beheading. In the city of Bononia, of Hermes, Aggeus, and Gaius.

## On the Nones · 5 January

[0617]

At Rome, the birthday of blessed Thelesphorus, pope, who, ordained pontiff seventh after Peter the apostle, carried through an illustrious martyrdom. At Antioch, of Saint Simeon, monk, whose life and conversation were exceedingly admirable.

## The eighth day before the Ides · 6 January

[0619]

The Epiphany of the Lord. In the territory of Reims, the passion of Saint Macra, virgin; who, at the command of the governor Rictiovarus, when she had been cast headlong into fire and had remained unharmed, then, her breasts cut off, and afflicted by the filth of prison, rolled also upon most sharp potsherds [Bouillart adds: and live coals], passed to the Lord praying. At Rennes, of Saint Melanius, bishop and confessor, who, after signs of virtues, continually intent upon heaven, passed from the world.

## The seventh day before the Ides · 7 January

[0623]

The bringing back of the boy Jesus out of Egypt. On the same day, of blessed Lucian, presbyter of the church of Antioch, and martyr, who, quite renowned for doctrine and eloquence, suffered at Nicomedia for the confession of Christ under the persecution of Maximinus, and was buried at Helenopolis of Bithynia. At Antioch, of Saint Clerus, deacon, who for the glory of confession was tortured seven times and long wasted in prison, and at last, beheaded, completed his martyrdom. In the city of Heraclea, of Felix, Januarius.

## The sixth day before the Ides · 8 January

[0627]

At Naples of Campania, the birthday of Saint Severinus, bishop, and confessor, brother of the most blessed Victorinus, martyr; which Severinus, after the performance of many virtues, rested full of holiness. At Beauvais, of the holy martyrs Lucian, presbyter, Maxianus and Julian, of whom Maxianus and Julian were first punished with the sword by the persecutors. Then blessed Lucian, after excessive beating, since he had not feared to confess the name of Christ with living voice, himself also received the sentence of the former. On the same day, of Saint Eugenianus, martyr.



## The fifth day before the Ides · 9 January

[0631]

At Antioch under Diocletian and Maximian, the birthday of the saints Julian, and Basilissa, virgin, whose wondrous passions are read. From whose company also a venerable multitude of priests and of ministers of the church of Christ was burned with fire, which had fled to them on account of the savagery of the persecution. After whom Antoninus, presbyter, Anastasius and Celsus, a boy, together with his mother, and many others suffered. At Mauritania Caesariensis, of Saint Martiana, virgin. At Smyrna, of the saints Vitalis, Revocatus, and Fortunatus. [*In Bouillart . . . . .* suffered. [nt: Castellanus, the inspector of the codex itself, observes (the words are Sollerius's) that from that pretended autograph a leaf was once torn out and afterwards restored, in an old script too, on which that change was made, whereas the other Usuardine codices have: 'At Smyrna, of the saints Vitalis, Revocatus and Fortunatus': it is another leaf, I grant; whether another hand, I doubt; certainly the same cast of letters, the same age of both writings. Perhaps for a leaf fouled with erasures or corrections Usuardus substituted another; the same scribe may not have been at hand. Nor do I conjecture this rashly. For wherever the Dervensis codex differs from the Pratensis, in the latter there are erasures; or, if the page is clean, I notice a hand of the same period indeed, but yet another. To one inquiring into the cause of this, the following seemed probable, and approved by the constant practice of authors. Before Usuardus dictated the Martyrology he had corrected much, and after the dictation much: when a leaf had become too fouled for the writing to be read with ease, he tore the leaf out and substituted another. Grant, therefore, that Vitalis, Revocatus and Fortunatus belonged to the first autograph. In the second they gave place to Revolutus and Firminus. Whence were these sought? I do not know. New Acts of the saints emerge daily from the corners of libraries. Perhaps those which Usuardus saw will emerge. That Revolutus and Firminus are of the Africans or the Smyrnaeans whom the other Martyrologies record on this day cannot be affirmed, unless perhaps Usuardus was unlettered (ἀναλφάβητος). For neither does the number agree, nor is there any connexion of the names with one another. Bouillart.] In Africa, of the holy martyrs Revolutus and Firminus with three others.]

## The fourth day before the Ides · 10 January

[0635]

At Cyprus, of blessed Nichanor, deacon, of the first seven, who, admirable for the grace of faith and for virtue, was most gloriously crowned. In the Thebaid, the birthday of blessed Paul, the first hermit, whose soul Saint Anthony saw carried to heaven by angels among the choirs of the apostles and of the prophets.

## The third day before the Ides · 11 January

[0637]

In Africa, the birthday of blessed Salvius. On his birthday Saint Augustine made a sermon to the people at Carthage. At Alexandria, of the holy confessors Peter, Leucius, whose acts are extant.

## The day before the Ides · 12 January

[0641]

At Achaia, the birthday of blessed Satyrus, martyr, who, passing before a certain idol, when he had breathed out upon it, signing his own forehead, it at once fell down; for which cause he was beheaded. On the same day, of Saint Archadius, martyr, renowned in birth and in miracles. [In Bouillart: [nt: That this Archadius suffered at Caesarea in Mauritania, both the Acts of the same Archadius and other Martyrologies of Usuardus too attest. What shall we gather from this contest? That our codex, as it seems to Sollerius, was not written by Usuardus's hand? Not in the least. But that these Acts of Saint Archadius were either wholly unknown to Usuardus or not seen by him; and that hence he fell into that error which other later writers of his Martyrology corrected. Moreover, there could have come into Usuardus's hands some codices into which the same error had crept the more easily because at that time it seems to have been common. Our Ruinart, Act. select. Mart., p. 590, cites several, and by name two Colbertine ones, one of the Reverend Fathers of the Feuillants, and another given to the monastery of Saint-Remi as a gift of Hincmar, bishop of Reims, in which Saint Archadius is read to have suffered at Caesarea in Mauritania. To the same monastery the same prelate also gave a copy of the treatises of Saint Zeno, bishop of Verona, of which the thirty-ninth of the first book is headed thus: *On the birthday of Saint Archadius, who has his birthday on the day before the Ides of January in the city of Caesarea in Mauritania.* Bouillart.] In Caesarea of Mauritania, of Saint Archadius, martyr, renowned in birth and in miracles.]

## On the Ides · 13 January

[0645]

At Rome on the Lavican Way, the crowns of forty soldiers, which under the emperor Gallienus they deserved to receive for the confession of the true faith. In the city of Poitiers, the birthday of Saint Hilary, bishop and confessor, who, banished for four years into Phrygia on account of the catholic faith, among other virtues is said to have raised a dead man. At Reims the metropolis, the deposition of Saint Remigius, bishop, a man of eminent virtue. The proclamation of whose holiness, by the merit of its belief, the nation of the Franks solemnly recalls with the worship of due veneration. [Bouillart adds, in cursive type: [nt: Castellanus rightly observed that these words, 'On Mount Verziaco', etc., were added by a more recent hand. Yet this addition was the sole reason why Bollandus judged the Heriniensis codex purer than the Pratensis codex. Bouillart.] On Mount Verziaco, of Saint Viventius, confessor.

## The nineteenth day before the Kalends · 14 January

[0649]

At Nola of Campania, the birthday of Saint Felix, presbyter [Bouillart: *episcopi*] [nt: Here too Castellanus had eyes. The little space where 'episcopi' is read in the first hand was erased. Likewise the announcement of the second Saint Felix lies on an erasure, at least these words: *Also on the same day.* Whether it was enough for Usuardus that Saint Felix had been designated and elected bishop by the people, for him to call him bishop, I have no mind to inquire. I am bound to answer not for his meaning but for his words. As for his adding another Felix, if it is a fault, it was the fault of very many others, who differ in few things, as will appear below, and not of Usuardus alone. Ado himself mixed together the acts of two Felixes, of whom other martyrologists before Usuardus said that the one was the brother of the other. Lamentable is the lot of one who followed guides not at all safe; and in this matter Sollerius ought to be the fairer toward Usuardus, the more manifestly he is himself caught in the fault which he would reprehend in him. Bouillart.] and confessor, of whom blessed Paulinus writes that, when he was being sent into prison by the persecutors, and lay placed upon shells and potsherds, he was loosed by night by an angel and led out. On the same day, of Saint Eufrasius, bishop.

## The eighteenth day before the Kalends · 15 January

[0653]

Of Habakkuk and Micah, the prophets, whose bodies were found by divine revelation under the emperor Arcadius. At Egypt, of blessed Macharius, abbot, disciple of blessed Anthony, most celebrated both in life and in miracles. Also, of Saint Isidore, most distinguished in holiness of life, in faith and in miracles. In the city of Arverni, of Saint Bonitus, [0655] bishop and confessor, whose life shone with virtues. In the territory of Angers, of Saint [nt: Because Usuardus does not call Saint Maurus the disciple of blessed Benedict, Sollerius, not mindful enough of his own dialectic, concludes from this that Usuardus never thought of the disciple of Saint Benedict, and that, when the ninth century was already well advanced, Maurus of Angers was not customarily numbered among the disciples of Benedict by the Benedictines themselves. Whereas this one thing follows: that no other Maurus of Angers was known at that time besides the disciple of Saint Benedict, and that it therefore seemed superfluous to Usuardus to add any mark by which Maurus of Angers might be distinguished from another. But, he says, *who that is sober would believe that Usuardus would have kept silent about this, who a little before in the same text proclaimed Macarius the disciple of Antony?* No sober man fails to see why he said this of Macarius: namely, because there were several abbots named Macarius, one of them the disciple of Antony. But I ask in turn: what prudent man would believe that a holy abbot, who was the ornament and propagator of the Benedictine family, never came into the mind of a Benedictine and was passed over in compiling a catalogue of the saints? Bouillart.] Maurus, abbot.

## The seventeenth day before the Kalends · 16 January

[0657]

Rome, on the Salarian Way, the birthday of Saint Marcellus, pope, who for the defence of the catholic faith, at the command of the tyrant Maximinus, was first beaten with cudgels, then assigned under public custody to the service of the animals, and after many years of serving there, clad in a garment of haircloth, died. At Arles, of blessed Honoratus, bishop, whose life was illustrious in doctrine and in miracles. [Bouillart inserts: [nt: Sollerius struck out Saint Titianus, although the agreement of the manuscripts is such that he almost thought he must yield to the torrent. Why he nonetheless resisted, the cause was this observation of his informant: that in the Pratensis whatever had been written in the first hand between Arles and Saint Furseus had been deleted. It is true that there is an erasure here. But he who erased the place had written what stands above. He only packed the letters a little more closely, so that room might be given to Saint Titianus, whom he had passed over in the first autograph. That Titianus is the bishop of the city of Opitergium, whom the printed Martyrologies of Usuardus and the German Martyrology commemorate on this day; whose Acts Ferrarius compiled from ancient monuments of the church of Opitergium. Bollandus reports these things on this same day. Bouillart.] Also in the city of Odobergia, of Saint Titianus, bishop and confessor.] At the monastery of Parrona, of Saint Furseus, confessor.

## The sixteenth day before the Kalends · 17 January

[0663]

At the Thebaid, of blessed Anthony, monk, whose body, found by divine revelation under the emperor Justinian, was brought to Alexandria and buried in the church of Saint John the Baptist. At Langres, the birthday of the holy twins Speusippus, Elasippus and Melasippus. Who, when they were twenty-five years of age, were crowned with martyrdom together with their grandmother Leonilla, and Jonilla, and Neon, in the time of the emperor Aurelian. In the city of Bourges, the deposition of Saint Sulpitius, bishop, whose life and precious death are commended by glorious miracles.

## The fifteenth day before the Kalends · 18 January

[0665]

Of the Chair of Saint Peter the apostle, in which he first sat at Rome. And the passion of Saint Prisca, virgin. At Pontus, the birthday of the holy martyrs Moseus and Ammonius, who, when they were soldiers, were first assigned to the mines, and at the last given over to the fire. [Bouillart in the margin: At Paris, in the monastery of Saint Germanus, the dedication of the altar in honour of the most victorious cross, and of the blessed and glorious and ever virgin Mary, and of the holy martyrs Maurice and his companions.]

## The fourteenth day before the Kalends · 19 January

[0669]

[0669]In Smyrna, the birthday of blessed Germanicus, martyr, who under Marcus Antoninus and Lucius Aurelius, through the grace of the power of God, shutting out the fear of bodily frailty, of his own accord provoked the beast made ready: ground by whose teeth, dying for him, he deserved to be incorporated into the true bread, that is, the Lord Jesus Christ. At Spoleto, of Saint Pontianus, martyr, in the times of the emperor Antoninus, whom the judge, having had him beaten most vehemently with rods for Christ, ordered to walk barefoot upon coals: harmed not at all by these, he was ordered to be hung upon the rack and iron hooks, and so to be thrust into prison; where he deserved to be comforted by an angelic visitation, after which, drenched with boiling lead, he was at length struck with the sword. In the district of Dorcasino, of Saint Launomarus, presbyter.

## The thirteenth day before the Kalends · 20 January

[0673]

At Rome, the birthday of blessed Fabian, pope, who, when he had presided over the Church thirteen years, suffered martyrdom in the time of Decius, and was buried in the cemetery of Calistus. On the same day at the Catacombs, of Saint Sebastian, martyr, who, when he held the command of the first cohort, was ordered by the emperor Diocletian, under the charge of Christianity, to be bound in the middle of a field, and to be shot with arrows by the soldiers, and at the last to be clubbed until he expired. On the Cornelian Way, of the holy martyrs Marius, and Martha, with their sons Audifax and Abacuc, nobles of Persia, who had come to Rome to pray in the time of the emperor Claudius. Of whom, after enduring cudgels, the rack, fires, hooks, the cutting off of hands, Martha was put to death in a pool, the rest were beheaded, and their bodies burned.

## The twelfth day before the Kalends · 21 January

[0677]

The birthday of blessed Publius, bishop, who, second after Dionysius the Areopagite, nobly ruled the Church of the Athenians, and, most distinguished in virtues and shining in doctrine, is gloriously crowned for the martyrdom of Christ. At Rome, the passion of Saint Agnes, virgin, who under Symphronius, prefect of the City, was thrown into fires, but, these being extinguished through her prayer, was struck with the sword. In the Spains, in the city of Tarragona, of the holy martyrs Fructuosus, bishop, Augurius and Eulogius, deacons, who in the time of Gallienus were first thrust into prison, then cast into the flames, and, their bonds burned away, their hands spread out in the form of a cross, praying that they might be burned, obtained it. At Troyes, of Saint Patroclus, martyr.

## The eleventh day before the Kalends · 22 January

[0679]

The birthday of Saint Timothy, disciple of blessed Paul. He, ordained bishop at Ephesus by the same Apostle, after many contests for Christ, was crowned with martyrdom. On the same day at the city of Valencia, under Dacianus, governor of the Spains, of Saint Vincent, Levite, and martyr. The noble triumph of whose passion the eminent versifier Prudentius splendidly sets forth in verses: Saint Augustine also, in a certain sermon, commends the praise of the same martyr, [0681] how much it is to be received with the honour of praise. [Bouillart reads: [nt: Sollerius says that Bollandus, who preferred our reading, was deceived by the Pratensis codex; but had he not himself been deceived by his ill-sighted informant, he would have paid his colleague much more honour. For what Castellanus advised is false: that the eulogy which Sollerius presented was erased, perhaps by some unskilled person. The same hand that had first written Sollerius's text, and afterwards erased it, substituted Bollandus's text, which is ours, in its place. I appeal to judges expert in this kind of letters. But how do these things cohere? Nothing is easier to explain. Usuardus, as soon as he had written his copy, allowed it to be copied. Hence the exemplars from which Sollerius drew his eulogy of Vincent. But after he had received his codex back, he blotted out what seemed to him less right and set beneath it what pleased him more. So here Sollerius gives Usuardus pouring out whatever came into his mind; we with Bollandus have edited Usuardus revised and remade by himself. Bouillart.] At Valencia, a city of Spain, of Saint Vincent, Levite and martyr, the triumph of whose contest, in the times of Diocletian and Maximian, after excessive beating and grievous torments, the text of his passion itself declares to have been completed under the governor Datianus.] At Rome at the Salvian Waters, of Saint Anastasius, monk and martyr. Who, after very many torments of prison, of scourgings and of chains, which he had endured in Caesarea of Palestine at the hands of the Persians, was at last afflicted with much punishment, and at the very last beheaded, with seventy others. On this same day, in the city of Ebredunum, of the holy martyrs Vincent, Orontius and Victor.

## The tenth day before the Kalends · 23 January

[0683]

At Philippi, of blessed Parmenas, who was one of the seven deacons. He, handed over to the grace of God by the brethren, fulfilling with full faith the enjoined office of preaching, obtained the glory of martyrdom. At Rome, the birthday of Saint Emerentiana, virgin, and martyr, who, while she was praying at the tomb of Saint Agnes, and at the same time was defending those praying from the harm of the gentiles, was stoned by them. In Mauritania, in the city of Cneocaesarea, of the saints Severianus and Aquila his wife, burned with fires. At the city of Antinoum, of Saint Asclae, martyr, who, first most atrociously tortured by hanging, then burned with flames applied to his sides, at the last, cast headlong into the river, gave back his precious soul to God.

## The ninth day before the Kalends · 23 January

[0687]

At Antioch, the birthday of Saint Babilas, bishop, who in the persecution of Decius, after he had frequently glorified the Lord by his sufferings and torments, obtained the end of a glorious life in chains. There are said also to have suffered with him three little ones, that is, Urbanus, Prilidanus and Epolonus. In the city of Cneocaesarea, of the saints Mardonius, Muso, Eugenius, Metellus, who were all given over to the fire, and their remains were scattered in the river Axus.

## The eighth day before the Kalends · 25 January

[0691]

The Conversion of Saint Paul, which came to pass in the second year of the Ascension of the Lord. On the same day, of Saint Ananias at Damascus, who baptized the same apostle. In the city of Arverni, of Saint Praejectus, bishop, and of Amarinus, a man of God, who suffered at the hands of the nobles of the aforesaid city. Also in the city of Gavali, of Saint Severianus, bishop, a man of wonderful holiness and doctrine.



## The seventh day before the Kalends · 26 January

[0693]

At Smyrna, the birthday of Saint Policarpus, who, a disciple of blessed John the apostle, and ordained bishop by him, was the chief of all Asia. Afterwards, under Marcus Antoninus and Lucius Aurelius, while the whole people [0695] of the same City cried out against him in the amphitheatre, he was given over to the fire. With whom also twelve others, coming from Philadelphia, were consummated by martyrdom in the aforesaid city. On the same day, of the holy martyrs Theogenes with thirty-six others, who, despising temporal death, obtained the crown of eternal life. [Bouillart: . . . [nt: These words, *under the emperor Lizinius*, had been suspect to Sollerius. But after he was advised by Castellanus that in the Pratensis codex the commemoration of Queen Bathildis had been obliterated or half-erased, and these words *under the emperor Licinius* written over it, he now, all hesitation laid aside, deleted that addition, as he calls it, and restored the commemoration of Queen Bathildis: but surely no one will approve it. For besides the fact that exactly the same hand repaired the erasure, it cannot be imputed to Usuardus as a fault that he says Theogenes fell a martyr under the emperor Licinius. I grant it true, what is commonly believed, that his death took place under Valerian. But that emperor had not one name only. I have seen in Mezabarba, D. Vaillant and other collectors of coins that he was also named Licinius. It is agreed too that that emperor of two names raged against the Christians. In proof of which I will not cite a great many Martyrologies; I will not use the authority of Augustine; I study brevity. What sin, then, did Usuardus commit when he referred the death of Theogenes to the time of Licinius? The commemoration of Saint Bathildis was indeed obliterated, but by the same author, and transferred for just causes to another day, as will be noted below. Bouillart.] under the emperor Lizinius obtained the crown of eternal life, *omitting what follows.]* In the territory of Paris, of Baltildis, queen.

## The sixth day before the Kalends · 27 January

[0699]

The birthday of blessed John, bishop of Constantinople, surnamed Chrysostom, who by word and example greatly profited the Christian religion. Also, of Saint Marius, abbot of the monastery *Bobacensis*; whose life full of virtues the illustrious man and patrician Dynamius writes. In Bethlehem of Judah, the falling-asleep of Saint Paula. Saint Jerome, writing her Life, admirable for virtues, testifies that she was crowned with a long martyrdom. In Africa, of Saint Avitus, martyr.

## The fifth day before the Kalends · 28 January

[0703]

At Rome, the birthday of Saint Agnes, the second time. And in the city of Apollonia, of the saints Leucius, Thyrsus and Calinicus, martyrs, who in the time of Decius, tormented with divers kinds of torments, the first and the last by the cutting off of the head, the middle one, called forth by a heavenly voice, giving up his spirit, completed their martyrdom. At Alexandria, of blessed Cyril, bishop, who stood forth as a most illustrious champion of the catholic faith. In the monastery *Beomensis*, the deposition of John, presbyter, a man of God. [Bouillart adds: [nt: Sollerius excluded Julian from the number of the saints of this day, on this ground: that that blessed prelate, as Castellanus notes, was added in the Pratensis codex in a more recent ink. Learned men, your good faith! When it is certain that the hand is the same, has account ever been taken, or should it be taken, of the ink? For I should like to know by what mark the age of an ink is to be discerned. Is it when it is blacker than in the other lines? If the matter stands so, it is all over with the old monuments of letters. For I think there are few in which the ink is of the same blackness throughout. Does it not very often happen to us too, that when the ink is changed the colour of the writing is changed? Shall what shows another colour therefore have been inserted by another's hand? Next, by the same argument the eulogy of John ought to have been cut away. For these words, *presbyter, a man of God*, are written on the same erasure and in the same ink as *At Cinomanni*, etc. This, I suppose, Castellanus did not point out, or else Sollerius, having been told, keeps it down in prudent silence. For the rest, Usuardus fittingly commemorates Saint Julian on this day, on which the Church of Paris, in which he lived and wrote, venerated him. Bouillart.] At Cinomanni, of Saint Julian, the first bishop of that city.]

## The fourth day before the Kalends · 29 January

[0707]

At Rome on the Numentan Way, the birthday of the saints Papias and Maurus, soldiers, whose mouths Laudicius, prefect of the City, ordered at their first confession of Christ to be bruised with stones, and so to thrust them back into prison, and afterwards to be beaten with cudgels, and at the last with leaded scourges, until they expired. On the same day at Trier, the deposition of blessed Valerius, bishop, disciple of Saint Peter the apostle. In the territory of Troyes, of Saint Sabinianus, who at the command of the emperor Aurelian was beheaded for the faith of Christ. [Bouillart adds: [nt: Castellanus wrote to Sollerius that the octave of Saint Vincent had been added to the Pratensis autograph, and at the same time that the last five letters of the text, *us est*, had been erased so that there might be room for the addition. All false. Nothing erased. Only the five letters contracted into two in this manner: *t° ē*. Nothing added either. Nor indeed is it any wonder that Usuardus remembered the octave of Saint Vincent. It was the received custom among the Benedictines that the brethren assembled in chapter should be forewarned by the reading of the Martyrology what feasts the Church would celebrate, the memory of which saints it would keep on the day next following. That the Martyrology was composed by Usuardus for this use is shown by the Rule of Saint Benedict and the Necrology inserted in the codex, which used to be read after the Martyrology. Could a monk of the Prés forget the octave which he knew to be consecrated to the patron of his own abbey? Bouillart.] And the octaves of Saint Vincent, martyr.]

## The third day before the Kalends · 30 January

[0709]

At Antioch, the passion of blessed Ypolitus, martyr, who, somewhat deceived by the schism of Novatus, corrected by the working of the grace of Christ, returned to the charity of the Church, for which [Bouillart adds: and in which] he completed an illustrious martyrdom. At Jerusalem, of the most holy Matthias, bishop, of whom they relate things wondrous and full of faith, that, having suffered many things for Christ, he at the last ended his life in peace. On this same day, the passion of Saint Flavianus, martyr. At the monastery of Malbodium, of Saint Aldegundis, virgin. [In Bouillart: . . . . . Flavianus, martyr. In the territory of Paris, [nt: Queen Bathildis, commemorated in this place, is the reason why the captious censor of the Pratensis codex did not deign on this day to count it among the pure. Yet the anonymous author of the Life of Bathildis, a contemporary of that queen, in Mabillon, Act. SS. saec. II, and in Bollandus, tom. II of January, recorded Bathildis's death on the third day before the Kalends. The most ancient Kalendar of the abbey of Corbie, written 700 years ago, ascribed her death to the same day; on the same day the Martyrologies make mention of Bathildis: the one called Saint Jerome's, that of Pontoise of the twelfth century, that of Fossés, the Colbertine codices A and D; the Victorine A and B; that of Saint-Denis, the Feuillant B, the Monstiburg.; the Church of Paris, and the monasteries of Corbie and Chelles, raised and ennobled by the bounty of Bathildis, keep this day as a feast and a solemnity. But by all these arguments Sollerius could not be brought to believe that this day was assigned by Usuardus to the death of Bathildis. What holds him back, then? The authority of Castellanus, of course, who advised that Bathildis had been substituted in the place of Aldegundis, erased. I do not indeed deny the erasure; but the informant ought not to have omitted that the same hand which wrote out the rest of the codex announced the commemoration of Bathildis here. Let judges practised in this kind of learning come. We are ready to give access to the codex. Bouillart.] of Baltildis, queen.]

## The day before the Kalends · 31 January

[0713]

At Alexandria, the birthday of blessed Metranus, martyr, when he would not utter impious words at the command of the pagans, they bruised his whole body with cudgels; and piercing his face and eyes with sharp reeds, they drove him out of the city with torments, and there with stones cast out the spirit which still remained in him. Also at Alexandria, of the holy martyrs Saturninus, Thyrsus and Victor. At the city of Trent, of Saint Vigilius, bishop and martyr. [Bouillart omits: At the city of Trent . . . . . martyr. [nt: Sollerius adds to this article: *At the city of Trent, of Saint Vigilius, bishop and martyr.* So his codices Heriniensis and Tornacensis close this day's article. So too the Dervensis, far older. There is therefore no doubt that the first autograph of Usuardus made mention of Vigilius of Trent on this day. Usuardus had imitated the Martyrologies which Bede, Florus, etc., had composed before him. Afterwards, having read the acts of Vigilius, he corrected the error. How fittingly he did so will be told on 26 June. Bouillart.]]

## FEBRUARY HAS 28 DAYS.

[0717]

## On the Kalends · 1 February

[0717]

The birthday of blessed Ignatius, bishop and martyr, who ruled the church of Antioch third after Peter the apostle: and in the persecution of Trajan he is sent bound to Rome, where, in the presence of the same, the senate sitting around, he was first afflicted with most monstrous punishments of torments, then he is cast to the lions, and, choked by their teeth, becomes a victim of Christ. At Smyrna, of Saint Pionius, martyr, who after the filth of prison, where he strengthened many of the brethren by his exhortations to the endurance of martyrdom, harassed with many torments, fixed with nails, and placed upon a burning pyre, obtained a blessed end of life for Christ. There suffered with him also fifteen others. On the same day, of blessed Ephrem, deacon of the church of Edessa. In the town *Tricastrinum*, of Saint Paul, bishop, [0719] whose life both shone with virtues, and his precious death is commended by miracles. In Scotia, of Saint Brigid, virgin, whose life shone with miracles.

## The fourth day before the Nones · 2 February

[0721]

The *Ypapanti* of the Lord. At Caesarea, of the most blessed Cornelius, the Centurion, whom blessed Peter baptized. He, raised at the aforesaid city to the episcopal honour, rested. At Rome on the Salarian Way, the passion of Saint Apronianus, who, hearing together with Sisinnius the deacon, while still a gentile, a voice made from heaven, *Come,* saying, *ye blessed of my Father* and the rest; believing, was baptized, and so afterwards in the confession of the Lord received the end of life by a capital sentence. [0723] Also at Rome, of the saints Fortunatus, Felicianus, Firmus, Candidus. At Orléans, of Saint Fuscolus, bishop.

## The third day before the Nones · 3 February

[0725]

In Africa, the birthday of blessed Celerinus, deacon and confessor, and of the holy martyrs Laurentinus, Ignatius, and Celerina: of the glorious praises of all of whom there is extant an epistle of blessed Cyprian. [Bouillart inserts: [nt: In this whole article nothing is more corrupt, in Sollerius's judgment. Three lines and a half blotted out; the mention of Blessed Blasius and of Saint Trifon written over them; the commemoration of Saint Deodatus added: and it is wonderful to tell how hot he grows against these faults. Castellanus is the cause. Had the monks of the Prés been consulted, Sollerius would have received this answer: in the Pratensis codex whatever space lies between *sanctorum* and *Remedii* was erased. But what was written over it shows the same form of script, though in letters perhaps somewhat smaller and set closer to one another than usual. The mention of Blasius is to be reckoned of no account, since a much more recent hand smeared it onto the edge of the codex. Nor ought Deodatus to detain you any more. A hand older indeed than the one that added Blasius added him in the margin, yet not contemporary with the first. Trifon Usuardus added. Rightly. For in this month the Greeks, among whom he suffered, venerate his memory. And his Acts, edited by Thierry Ruinart, attest that Trifon and Respicius were tortured in the harshness of winter, in the violence of a storm. Which suits February better than November, in which the Roman Church honours Saint Trifon. Bouillart.] in the city of Nicaea, the passion of Saint Triphon in the time of the emperor Ducius. *And in the margin:* of blessed Blasius, bishop and martyr.--At Latiniacum, the birthday of Saint Deodatus, bishop and confessor.] At the town of Vapingum, the deposition of the bishops Tigris and Remedius.

## The day before the Nones · 4 February

[0729]

In a city of Egypt which is called Thmuis, the passion of blessed Fileas, bishop, and of Filoromus, tribune, with whom also an innumerable multitude of the faithful from the same city, following the example of their shepherd, was crowned with martyrdom, as the eighth book of the ecclesiastical History tells. At Rome, at Forum Simpronii, of the holy martyrs Aquilinus, Geminus, Gelasius, Magnus, Donatus. At Troyes, of Saint Aventinus, bishop and confessor [nt: After the commemoration of Saint Avienus almost the whole line has been erased, and that before the copy of the Martyrology was offered to Charles, since in the Devensis codex Saint Aventinus is announced last. Bouillart.].

## On the Nones · 5 February

At Sicily, in the city of the Catanians, the birthday of Saint Agatha, virgin and martyr, who, after blows and prison, after the rack and tortures, after the cutting off of her breasts, after rolling upon potsherds and coals, was at length consummated in prison under the judge Quintianus. At Vienne, of blessed Avitus, bishop and confessor, by whose faith, and industry and admirable doctrine, the Gauls were defended from the assault of the Arian [nt: It irks me to point out that the word *Arianae* is not omitted by the Pratensis codex, as Sollerius charges against it. Bouillart.] heresy.

## The eighth day before the Ides · 6 February

At Caesarea of Cappadocia, the birthday of Saint Dorothea, virgin, who, first harassed on the rack, then long beaten with palms, at the last was punished by beheading. At whose confession a certain Theophilus, a scholastic, was converted, and soon, himself most sharply tortured on the rack, at the last was slain with the sword. At Arverni, of blessed Antholianus, martyr. On the same day, of the holy bishops Vedastus and Amandus, whose life and death alike were [nt: Sollerius notes that in the autograph there is *existit* for *exstitit*. A diligent author! He passes over nothing, and hence conjectures that the letters of the autograph are twisted. Nothing is emptier than the conjecture.] glorious with very many miracles. Of whom the former ruled the church of the *Adartenses*, but the latter that of the *Trajectenses*.

## The seventh day before the Ides · 7 February

[0739]

In the Britains, in the city of Augusta, the birthday of blessed Augulus, bishop, who, completing the course of his time through martyrdom, deserved to receive eternal rewards. Also, of Saint Moyses, bishop, This man, first leading a solitary life in the desert, had become magnificently [nt: The Pratensis alone, observes Sollerius, omitted the word *magnifice*. The blame for the false observation I lay either on Castellanus or on him who first copied the codex at the order of Bollandus. Bouillart.] known by signs and virtues, but afterwards converted in great part to the faith of Christ the nation of the Saracens, to which he had been made bishop, and so, glorious in merits, rested in peace.

## The sixth day before the Ides · 8 February

At Armenia the Lesser, the birthday of the saints Dionisius, Emilianus and Sebastian. On the same day at Alexandria, of Saint Cointa, martyr, her the pagans, having seized her and leading her to the idols, were forcing to adore; which when she, execrating them, refused, binding fetters upon her feet, and dragging her through the streets of the whole city, they tore her apart with a horrible punishment. [Brouillart: [nt: Sollerius holds such an opinion of Usuardus that he would not have him sin against the laws of geography; and hence he denies that Lusitania was written by him, because in it he placed Cordoba. Whether Usuardus slipped in memory I do not know. Certainly his hand slipped. Bouillart.] In the province of Lusitania, in the city of Cordoba, of Saint Salominis, martyr. *And in cursive type:* At Verdun, of Saint Paul, bishop and confessor.] In the city of Cordoba, of Saint Salomon, martyr.

## The fifth day before the Ides · 9 February

[0745]

At Alexandria, the passion of Saint Apollonia, virgin, from whom the persecutors first knocked out all her teeth. Then, when they threatened that they would burn her alive, unless she uttered impious words with them, she, deliberating herself a little something, suddenly burst forth from the hands of the impious, and leapt into the fire which they had prepared. At Suevo near Cyprus, of the saints Ammon and Alexander. [Bouillart adds, *in cursive type:* At Fontenella, of Saint Ansbertus, bishop and confessor.]

## The fourth day before the Ides · 10 February

[0747]

At Rome, the birthday of the holy martyrs Zoticus, Hireneus, Jacinctus, and Amantius. In the East, of Saint Sotheris, virgin, who, beaten most heavily and very long with blows, when she had also overcome the other kinds of punishments, completed her martyrdom by the sword. Also at Rome on the Lavican Way, of ten soldiers. [nt: So that there might be room for Austreberta, the last line was deleted entire by Usuardus, and these words, *sister of Saint Benedict, abbot*, written in rather smaller letters. Saint Austreberta was lacking in the first copy. Sollerius ought to have followed his own codices: or, if the Pratensis seemed preferable in this place, it ought to have seemed preferable everywhere, since the script of this addition is the same as that of the rest. I do not point out here that Saint Austreberta is fittingly commemorated. That this holy virgin died on this day is the one opinion of all. Bouillart.] At the Castrum Cassinum, of Saint Scolastica, virgin, sister of Saint Benedict, abbot. [nt: In Bouillart these words are read, written by hand on the margin of the page: *These are not Usuardus's. See the Acta SS. of Mabillon, sec. III, part. I, p. 28 A.*] In the district of Rouen, of Saint Austreberta, virgin.

## The third day before the Ides · 11 February

[0751]

At Lyon, the birthday of Saint Desiderius, bishop and confessor. On the same day at the fort *Nantonense*, of Saint Severinus, abbot of the monastery of Agaunum, by whose prayers the worshipper of God, King Clovis, was freed from his long infirmity. At Alexandria, the deposition of Saint Eufrasia, virgin, who in the monastery shone by the virtue of abstinence and also by miracles.

## The day before the Ides · 12 February

[0753]

In the Spains, the birthday of Saint Eulalia, virgin, who, it is agreed, in the time of the emperor Diocletian received the glorious crown of martyrdom, in the city of Barcelona. In Africa. of the holy martyrs Saturninus, presbyter, Dativus, Felix, Apelius and his companions, who suffered for Christ under the proconsul Anolinus. At Alexandria, of Modestus and Ammonius, infants.

## On the Ides · 13 February

[0755]

The birthday of Saint Agabus, the prophet, at Antioch, of whom blessed Luke writes in the apostolic Acts. In the city Militana of Armenia, of Saint Polioctus, martyr, who is interpreted in Latin *much praying.* In the city of Angers, of Saint Lizinius, bishop, a man of venerable holiness.



## The sixteenth day before the Kalends · 14 February

[0759]

At Rome, the birthday of blessed Valentine, presbyter, who, after many marks of healings and of doctrine, was beaten with cudgels, and so beheaded, under Claudius Caesar. Also at Rome, of the holy martyrs Vitalis, Felicula and Zeno. In the city of Interamna, of blessed Valentine, bishop, who, after a long beating, was consigned to custody. when he could not be overcome, cast out of prison in the silence of midnight, he was beheaded. At Alexandria, of the holy martyrs Bassus, Antonius, Protolicus, who were drowned in the sea. Also, of Cyrion, presbyter, Moyses, Bassianus, Agatho, who were all burned with fire. Also of Dionisius and Ammonius, beheaded.

## The fifteenth day before the Kalends · 15 February

[0763]

At the city of Sebaste, the passion of Saint Blavius, bishop, who, a worker of many miracles, under the governor Agricolanus, after a long beating and hanging upon the wood, where his flesh was torn apart with iron combs, after a most foul prison, and immersion in a lake, whence he came out safe, at the command of the aforesaid judge is beheaded together with two boys. But at the last seven women, who were gathering the drops of his blood as they flowed down, caught because they were Christians, after dire torments were struck with the sword. At Rome, of Saint Craton, martyr, who, instructed in the teachings of the faith by blessed Valentine, not many days after was consummated by martyrdom with his wife and his whole household. In the city of Brixa, of the holy martyrs Faustinus and Jovia, virgin. In the Gauls, in the city *Vasionensis*, of Saint Quinidus, bishop, whose death, precious in the sight of the Lord, frequent miracles testify. The city of Interamna, of Saint Agapis, virgin.

## The fourteenth day before the Kalends · 16 February

[0767]

The birthday of blessed Honesimus, of whom Saint Paul writes to Philemon: whom the same apostle, ordaining him bishop, and committing to him the word of preaching, left at the city of the Ephesians. He, brought to Rome, and there stoned for the faith of Christ, thence his body was carried to the places where he had been ordained. In the city of Cumae, of Saint Juliana, virgin, who, after various torments, and the custody of prison, openly fought with the devil. Then, overcoming the flames of fires and a boiling pot, she completed her martyrdom by the beheading of her head. At Egypt, of Saint Julian, martyr, with others to the number of five thousand.

## The thirteenth day before the Kalends · 17 February

[0769]

In Persis, in the city of Babylon, the birthday of blessed Polochronius, bishop and martyr, who, in the presence of Decius the persecutor, struck on the mouth with stones, his hands stretched out, lifting his eyes to heaven, sent forth his spirit. At the city of Concordia, the passion of the saints Donatus, Secundianus, Romulus, with eighty-six others. In Scotia, of Saint Fintanus, presbyter and confessor, a man of great virtue. On this same day, of Saint Silvinus, bishop *Taruanensis*. [In Bouillart: . . . a man of great virtue. On this same day, of Saint Silvinus, bishop of the city of Toulouse.]

## The twelfth day before the Kalends · 18 February

[0773]

The birthday of blessed Simeon, bishop and martyr, who is known to have been a kinsman of the Saviour according to the flesh, and the son of Cleophas, who was the brother of Joseph. He, ordained bishop of Jerusalem after James the brother of the Lord, in the persecution of Trajan, afflicted with punishments for a long time, was consummated by martyrdom. All who were present, and the judge himself, marvelling that an old man of a hundred and twenty years had endured the punishment of the cross. In the city of Ostia, of the holy martyrs Maximus, Claudius and his wife Prepedigna with two sons, who, since they were of a most illustrious family, were seized at the command of Diocletian, and deported into exile; then, burned in a fire, they rendered to God the sweet-smelling sacrifice of martyrdom.

## The eleventh day before the Kalends · 19 February

[0777]

At Rome, the birthday of Saint Gabinius, presbyter and martyr, who, long afflicted with chains in custody by Diocletian, purchased the joys of heaven by a precious death. In Africa, of the saints Publius and Julian.

## The tenth day before the Kalends · 20 February

[0779]

At the city of Tyre, of the blessed martyrs, whose number the knowledge of God alone gathers. Who, at the command of Diocletian, were slain by many punishments of torments succeeding one another. First indeed torn with scourges over the whole body, then given to divers kinds of beasts, but guarded from these by divine power, after the added ferocity of fire and of iron, they completed their martyrdom. This glorious multitude Tyrannio and Silvanus urged on to victory, and also Peleus and Linus, bishops, Zenobius too, presbyter, who by a happy contest obtained, together with them, the palm of martyrdom. In the island of Cyprus, of the saints Potamius, and Nemesius. At Alemannia, of Saint Gall, presbyter and confessor.

## The ninth day before the Kalends · 21 February

[0781]

At Sicily, of the holy martyrs seventy-nine, who under Diocletian, through divers torments, deserved to receive the crown of their confession prepared for them by Christ. In Africa, in the city of Adrumetum, of the saints Verolus, secundinus, Servulus and twenty others. [Bouillart, at the edge of the page: At the monastery of Saint Germanus, the consecration of the altar in honour of the blessed martyrs John and Paul and of Saint Blasius, and also of the holy confessors Benedict, Lupus and Egidius. Also the consecration of the altar in honour of the Holy Innocents and of the holy virgins Columba, Margaret, Catherine.]

## The eighth day before the Kalends · 22 February

[0785]

At Antioch, of the Chair [Bouillart: *Cathedra*] of Saint Peter. On the same day, of blessed Papias, bishop of the city of Hierapolis, who was a hearer of John the apostle, but a fellow disciple and companion of Polycarpus. Also, of Saint Aristion, who was one of the seventy-two disciples of Christ. At Alexandria, of Saint Abilius, bishop, who, second bishop after blessed Mark, conspicuous in virtue, ministered the priesthood thirteen years, [In Bouillart, at the edge of the page: On the same day the consecration of the altar in honour of the blessed martyrs Eustachius and his companions, and of Saint Medard, confessor of Christ.]

## The seventh day before the Kalends · 23 February

[0787]

At Syrmium, of blessed Sinerus, monk and martyr, who, seized at the command of the emperor Maximian, when he confessed that he was a Christian, was beheaded. Also the birthday of sixty-two, who, completing the contest of martyrdom in the aforesaid city, received the abiding kingdoms. On this same day, of Saint Policarpus, presbyter and confessor, who with blessed Sebastian converted very many to the faith of Christ, and by exhorting led them to the glory of martyrdom.

## The sixth day before the Kalends · 24 February

[0791]

The birthday of blessed Matthias the apostle, who after the ascension of the Lord, chosen by lot by the apostles, at Judaea the Gospel of Christ, preached. Also, the finding of the head of the Forerunner of the Lord, in the time of the emperor Marcian, when the same Forerunner first revealed to two monks where that same head of his lay hidden. In Caesarea of Cappadocia, of Saint Sergius, martyr, whose most illustrious acts are extant.

## The fifth day before the Kalends · 25 February

[0793]

At Egypt, the birthday of the saints Victorinus, Victor, Nicoforus, Claudianus, Dioscorus, Serapion and Papias under the emperor Numerian: of whom the first, second and third steadfastly enduring exquisite kinds of punishments for the confession of the Godhead, the remaining four, Claudianus and Dioscorus, burned with flames. Serapion [sic: *Serapionis*] and Papias were slain with the sword. All of them therefore dedicated a celebrated martyrdom.

## The fourth day before the Kalends · 26 February

[0797]

In the city of Perge of Pamphylia, the birthday of blessed Nestor, bishop, who in the persecution of Decius, when he was intent upon prayer day and night, asking that the flock of Christ might be guarded, was seized, and, having confessed the name of the Lord with wonderful freedom and eagerness, was most cruelly tortured on the rack. Thence by hanging on the cross he passed away a victor. At Alexandria, of Saint Alexander, bishop, a glorious old man. He, after blessed Peter, cast out of the church Arius, his presbyter, depraved by heretical impiety and convicted by divine truth, and afterwards, among the three hundred and eighteen Fathers, condemned the same also in the council of Nicaea.

## The third day before the Kalends · 27 February

[0799]

At Alexandria, the passion of Saint Julian, martyr. He, since he was so bound by gout that he could neither walk nor stand, together with Eunus his servant, is presented to the judge in a chair; who, set upon camels, are ordered to be led about through the whole city, and to be torn with scourges on this side and that, the people looking on, until they met their end in the very beatings. In the Spains, in the city of Seville, the birthday of Saint Leander, bishop and confessor, by whose preaching and industry the whole nation of the Goths was converted from the Arian impiety through King Recharedus. At Lyon, of Saint Baldomeris, a man of God, whose tomb is made illustrious by frequent miracles.

## The day before the Kalends · 28 February

[0803]

In the territory of Lyon, in the Jura places, the deposition of blessed Romanus, abbot, who first led the hermit's life there, and, renowned for many virtues and miracles, afterwards became the father of very many monks. On the same day, of the saints Macharius and Rufinus.

## MARCH HAS 31 DAYS.

[0805]

## On the Kalends · 1 March

[0805]

At Rome, of the holy martyrs two hundred and sixty, whom Claudius first ordered, condemned for the name of Christ, to dig sand. Then he commanded that they be sent outside the walls of the Salarian gate, and be killed in the amphitheatre of the same city by the arrows of soldiers. On the same day, of Saint Donatus, martyr, who suffered at Carthage under the duke Ursacius and Marcellinus the tribune. At Angers, of Saint Albanus [Bouillart: *Albini*], bishop and confessor, a man of most illustrious virtue and holiness. In the city of Marseille, of the saints Hermes and Adrianus.

## The sixth day before the Nones · 2 March

[0809]

At Rome on the Latin Way, of the holy martyrs Jovinus and Basileus, who suffered under the emperors Gallienus and Valerian. Also at Rome, of very many martyrs, whom, long tortured, the emperor Alexander at the last condemned by capital sentence.



## The fifth day before the Nones · 3 March

[0811]

At Caesarea of Palestine, of the holy martyrs Marinus, soldier, and Asterius, senator, under the persecution of Valerian; of whom the former, when he had been accused by his fellow soldiers of being a Christian, and he testified with a most clear voice that he was a Christian, received the crown of martyrdom by the cutting off of his head. And when the latter received upon his shoulders set beneath it, and upon the garment he was wearing spread under it, the martyr's beheaded body, the honour which he paid to the martyr he himself at once received as a martyr. On the same day, the birthday of the saints Emetherius and Celedonius, who, at first soldiers at the city *Legionensis* of Gallicia, when the storm of persecution arose, afflicted with very many torments for the confession of the name of Christ, were led as far as Calagurris, and there were crowned with martyrdom.

## The fourth day before the Nones · 4 March

[0815]

At Rome on the Appian Way, the birthday of blessed Lucius, pope and martyr, who, in the persecution of Valerian and Gallienus, banished into exile for the faith of Christ, and afterwards by the divine will permitted to return to his church, completed his martyrdom by the cutting off of his head. Also at Rome on the Appian Way, of the holy martyrs nine hundred, who are laid in the cemetery at Saint Cecilia. On the same day, of Saint Caius, of the palace, drowned in the sea.

## The third day before the Nones · 5 March

[0817]

At Antioch, the birthday of blessed Focas, martyr, who, after the many injuries which he suffered for the name of the Redeemer, how he triumphed over that ancient serpent is declared to the peoples even today. On this same day, the passion of Saint Eusebius, of the palace, and of nine other martyrs.

## The day before the Nones · 6 March

[0819]

At Nicomedia, the birthday of the saints Victor and Victorinus, who for three years, with Claudianus and Bassa his wife, afflicted with many torments and thrust back into prison, there fulfilled the course of their life. In the city of Toledo, the deposition of Julian, bishop, who is held most famous among the inhabitants of the same place.

## On the Nones · 7 March

[0821]

In Mauritania, in the city of the Tuburbitani, the birthday of the holy martyrs Perpetua and Felicitas, and with them of Revocatus, Saturninus and Secundolus, of whom the last rested in prison, all the rest were given to the beasts under the emperor Severus.

## The eighth day before the Ides · 8 March

[0825]

In the city of Antinoum, the birthday of the saints Philemon and Apollonius, deacon, who, seized and heard by the judge, when they had steadfastly refused to sacrifice to idols, their heels pierced, were dragged horribly through the city, and at the last, slain with the sword, completed their martyrdom. On the same day at the aforesaid city, the passion of Arrianus, Theoticus, and three others; whom the judge killed, sunk in the sea, but by the service of a dolphin their bodies were restored to the shore. At Carthage, of Saint Pontius, deacon of blessed Cyprian, bishop, who, bearing exile with him up to the day of his passion, left an excellent volume of his life and passion, and, renowned in sufferings, merited the crown of life.

## The seventh day before the Ides · 9 March

[0827]

At the city of Nisena the deposition of Saint Gregory, bishop, brother of blessed Basil of Caesarea as most illustrious in life as in eloquence. In the city of Barcelona, of Saint Patianus, bishop who, in the time of the emperor Theodosius, in an excellent old age obtained the end of his life.

## The sixth day before the Ides · 10 March

[0829]

At Apamia, the birthday of the saints Alexander and Gaius, martyrs, who, as Apollinaris, bishop of Hierapolis, writes in the book *Against the Catafrigae*, in the persecution of Antoninus Verus were crowned with a glorious martyrdom In Persis, of the holy martyrs to the number of forty-two. At Paris, the deposition of Saint Droctoveus, abbot disciple of blessed Germanus, bishop. [Bouillart adds: On this same day, [nt: Here Sollerius summons the Pratensis codex to court, because Saint Attalus is added to the saints of this day; since not a few handwritten codices, and those of any worth you please, do not commemorate that holy abbot, and others do so in another manner: it is not credible, he says, that he would have been absent from those manuscripts if the source itself, from which those streamlets were drawn, had had him: he therefore suspects that the words of the Pratensis are more recent. That he may refute his own petty reasonings himself, I ask one thing: that he come and inspect the codex. For what weight have conjectures against what really is? Nor let him object the erasure to us. For he confesses that both the forty-two martyrs and Droctoveus the abbot are Usuardus's, and yet they too are written on the same erasure as Attalus. Nor yet do I deny that Attalus was added, since the Dervensis codex is silent about him. But Usuardus was free to enrich his Martyrology when he pleased, and with what saints he pleased. Nor was it necessary that he should send his codex anywhere at all the moment he had corrected something in it, or make known by letter what he had added to the codex and what he had taken away. That this is the day on which Saint Attalus, or Attala, ought to have been commemorated, there is no need for me to prove. His Acts are in everyone's hands. Bouillart.] of Saint Attalus, abbot, disciple of Saint Columbanus.]

## The fifth day before the Ides · 11 March

[0833]

At Sebaste of Lesser Armenia, the birthday of the forty holy soldiers, who, in the time of King Licinius, after chains and very frequent imprisonments, after their faces were beaten with stones, were sent into a pool, and so at length completed their martyrdom by the breaking of their legs. And the more noble [nt: The Pratensis codex omitted the word 'nobiliores'. The observation is Sollerius's. Yet there is no word in the whole article that strikes the eyes more forcibly. Bouillart.] among them were Quirion and Candidus.

## The fourth day before the Ides · 12 March

[0835]

At Rome, of the blessed pontiffs Gregory, doctor, and apostle of the English, and Innocent. At Nicomedia, the passion of Saint Peter, martyr. He, since he was chamberlain of the emperor Diocletian, and complained too freely of the immense punishments of the martyrs, at the command of the same is brought out into the midst, and first, hung up, he is tortured very long with scourges, then, drenched with vinegar and salt, at the last he is roasted on a gridiron, and so he stood forth heir both of the faith and of the name of the true Peter. Also at Nicomedia, of the saints Egdunus, presbyter, and seven others, who were suffocated day by day, that fear might be struck into the rest.

## The third day before the Ides · 13 March

[0839]

[0839]At Nicomedia, the birthday of the holy martyrs Macedonius, presbyter, Patricia and Modesta. In the city of Nicaea, of the holy martyrs Theuseta, Horris, Theodora, Nimpodora, Mark, Arabia, who were all given over to the fire. In the Thebaid, the deposition of Saint Eufrasia, virgin.

## The day before the Ides · 14 March

[0841]

At Rome, the passion of the saints forty-seven. These were baptized by blessed Peter the apostle, when he was held in the custody of the Mamertine, with his fellow apostle Paul, where they were detained nine months; all of whom, under a most devoted confession of the faith, were consumed by the Neronian sword. In Africa, of Saint Peter, martyr. Also of Saint Eufrosius.

## On the Ides · 15 March

[0843]

In Caesarea of Cappadocia, the passion of Saint Longinus, who pierced the side of the Lord with a lance, as is found in his acts. At the city of Thessalonica, the birthday of Saint Matrona, martyr, who, caught and afflicted in many ways, at the last beaten to death with stout cudgels, in the confession of Christ rendered her spirit uncorrupted to God.

## The seventeenth day before the Kalends · 16 March

[0847]

At [nt: In the Caroline autograph mention of Saints Hilary and Tatianus was never made. For the Dervensis codex is silent about them, and takes the beginning of the article from Cyriacus. Besides, in the Pratensis this whole article suffers from an erasure from head to foot, and, so that there might be room for those saints, it is written out entire in a smaller form of letters. Nor again do the Heriniensis and Tornacensis codices commemorate those saints, which were for the most part Sollerius's standard by which to value the Pratensis. Here I ask Sollerius for what cause he preferred the Pratensis and departed from his own. In the Pratensis there was an erasure, the other codices varied. On these two arguments alone he everywhere judged the Pratensis codex interpolated. In this place, therefore, or nowhere, his rule ought to have had room Yet Sollerius gives the whole article: it is wholly Usuardus's, pure Usuardus. Of the erasure not even a word from the censor; I suppose, because he was advised that there is no dissimilarity of script there, and that it is to be counted to Usuardus's praise that, after the example of eminent writers, he neither thought an erasure in his writings shameful nor feared it. Why in the same case Sollerius was not always of the same mind toward the Pratensis codex, I would rather not know than suspect anything maliciously of the zeal for truth with which he declares that he burns. Bouillart.] Aquileia, the birthday of blessed Hilary, bishop, and Tatianus, deacon, who under the governor Beronius, after the rack and other torments, together with Felix, Largus, and Dionysius, ended their martyrdom. At Rome, the passion of Saint Cyriacus, deacon, who after a long wasting in prison, drenched with melted pitch and stretched upon the scaffold, and dragged, beaten also with thongs and cudgels, at the last, with Largus and Smaragdus and twenty others, at the command of Maximinus, was beheaded. Their feast, however, is kept on the sixth day before the Ides of August, on which day their bodies were raised by blessed Marcellus, pope, and reverently entombed. At Arverni, the deposition of Saint Patrick, bishop and confessor.

## The sixteenth day before the Kalends · 17 March

[0849]

In Scotia, the birthday of Saint Patrick, bishop and confessor, who first preached Christ there. [0851] On the same day, at the monastery of Nivigella, of Saint Gertrude, virgin. [In Bouillart . . . . : preached. In the city of Nicomedia, of the holy martyrs Eugenius, Pamphilianus, Castor and Serenus [nt: Sollerius hesitates whether to call the codex corrupted or altered. Four holy martyrs both badly joined and wrongly brought over here. Gertrude thrust out of her place and ineptly inserted among the saints of the following day, two texts corrupted by one error. And these injuries he pours out over the erasure of a single line, he who a little before bore the erasure of nine whole lines with a quiet and even mind. What do I say to this? It is true that those holy martyrs were not commemorated in the Caroline autograph; but that they were either badly joined or wrongly drawn here, by what argument will Sollerius make out? Has he any Acts to bring forward? He will thrust the Hieronymian lists upon us, I know well enough: but in their most ancient codices not even one of those is read of whom Usuardus speaks here. Nor had it been dealt with on the day before. For so they have it, on the witness of Henschenius: At Nicomedia, of Castor, Dionysius, Nonnus, Cyriaca, Milisa, Eugenia, Julian, Asclepiodotus. Other codices indeed announce Castor, others Serenus, others, one class having been made out of two, Pamphilianus. What certainty can be beaten out of that conflict of codices? Perhaps Usuardus had other lists; perhaps he joined both classes of the Nicomedian martyrs on one day; perhaps he saw Acts. In short, I would rather conjecture anything at all than, like Sollerius, reject with no argument a codex not at all suspect. Of Saint Gertrude presently, in the following article. Bouillart.].]

## The fifteenth day before the Kalends · 18 March

[0853]

The birthday of blessed Alexander, bishop, who, coming from Cappadocia, from his own city, to Jerusalem with a holy desire, by divine revelation thereupon took up the government of that place, and, after a venerable old age, led to Caesarea, in the persecution of Decius completed his martyrdom for the confession of Christ. [Bouillart adds: [nt: This is the true place of Saint Gertrude. And I wonder how Henschenius and others could be deceived, who recorded the death of that holy Virgin on the sixteenth day before the Kalends of this month. Usuardus himself had gone astray in the Caroline autograph; but he fittingly corrected the error in his own: the same Acts which had deceived him, weighed more diligently, brought him back into the way. The writer of the Life relates that Blessed Gertrude, when the day of her death was at hand, sent one of the brothers to the monastery of Fosses, to ask of Ultan, a holy dweller of that place, on what day she was to die: that Ultan answered: Today is the sixteenth day before the Kalends of April. But tomorrow, during the solemnities of the Mass, that handmaid of God and virgin of Christ is to depart from the body: that Gertrude, on receiving this message, spent the whole night with the sisters in psalms and prayers, and on the morrow, a Sunday, gave up her spirit. That Sunday, therefore, was the fifteenth day before the Kalends of April. Gertrude therefore did not die in the year 664, as Henschenius thinks; nor in the year 659, as the most distinguished (v. cl.) Baillet prefers: but in the year 658, in which Easter fell on 25 March, lunar cycle 13, solar 23, Dominical Letter G. Why, you will say, do the same Acts report that she died on a Sunday, on the sixteenth day before the Kalends of April? The Acts, badly copied, do indeed report it; but that the reading must be kept which our Mabillon drew from the Feuillant codex is plain even from this, that otherwise the writer of the Life would not be consistent with himself. For if Gertrude was to die on the day after XVI Kal. Apr., how could she die on XVI Kal. April? Bouillart.] At the monastery of Nivigella, of Saint Geretrudis, virgin.]

## The fourteenth day before the Kalends · 19 March

[0855D]

The birthday of blessed John, a man of great holiness, who, a native of Syria, came to Italy: and there, having built a monastery at the city *Penarensis*, being for forty years the father of many servants of God, renowned for many virtues he rested in peace. On the same day at Surrentum, of the saints Quintus, Quintillus, Quartilla, Mark, with nine others. In the city of Brixa, of Saint Calocerus [nt: Not only the name of Calocerus, as Castellanus noted, but also that whole space from *sanctorum* to the end has been deleted. Nor yet does this prevent the text of the Usuardine codex from seeming pure to Sollerius. And certainly not wrongly, since the hand is the same. But it is worth knowing for what reason he pays such honour to the Pratensis codex: namely, because all the codices of best credit with one accord placed Calocerus on this day. The order of argument will perhaps seem preposterous, especially since with Sollerius the Pratensis codex holds the first place by title of antiquity. Bouillart.], martyr.

## The thirteenth day before the Kalends · 20 March

[0859]

In Asia, the birthday of Saint Archippus, fellow soldier of blessed Paul, of whom the same Apostle makes mention in his epistle, writing to the Colossians. At Britain, the deposition of Saint Cuthbert, who from an anchorite became bishop of the church of Lindisfarne, and led his whole life, from infancy to old age, renowned for the signs of miracles. In Syria, of the saints Paul, Cyril, Eugenius with four others. On this same day, of Saint Vulfrannus, confessor.

## The twelfth day before the Kalends · 21 March

[0861]

At the fortress of Cassinum, the birthday of Saint Benedict, abbot, the life of this man, glorious in virtues and miracles, blessed Pope Gregory writes. At Alexandria, of blessed Serapion, anchorite, a man of great virtues. In the territory of Lyon, of Saint Lupicinus, abbot, whose life was illustrious for holiness, and for the glory of miracles.

## The eleventh day before the Kalends · 22 March

[0863]

At Septimania, in the city of Biterris, the deposition of Saint Afrodisius, bishop and confessor. He, ordained bishop for the same city by blessed Paul, [0865] bishop of Narbonne, distinguished in the teachings of the faith and adorned with the merits of virtues, rested in peace.

## The tenth day before the Kalends · 23 March

[0867]

In Africa, of the holy martyrs Victorianus, Frumentius, and another Frumentius, and two brothers, who, in the Vandal persecution, as Victor, an African bishop, writes, under King Huneric, for the constancy of their catholic confession, tortured with most savage punishments, were crowned with an excellent martyrdom. At Antioch, of Saint Theodorus, presbyter. In the city of Caesarea, of Saint Julian.

## The ninth day before the Kalends · 24 March

[0869]

At Rome, the passion of blessed Pigmenius, presbyter. He nourished Julian the apostate from a boy and instructed him in sacred letters, by whom he himself was afterwards put to death in the Tiber for the faith of Christ. In Mauritania, the birthday of the saints Romulus and Secundolus, brothers, who were born for Christ. At Syria, of Saint Seleucus. Also in Phrygia, of Saint Agapitus.

## The eighth day before the Kalends · 25 March

[0871]

At Nazareth, a city of Galilee, the Annunciation of the Lord. At Sirmium, the passion of blessed Hireneus, bishop, in the time of the emperor Maximian, who, first vexed with most bitter torments, then tortured in prison for very many days, at the last was consummated by the cutting off of his head. At Rome, of Saint Cyrinus, martyr. who, after the loss of his property, after the filth of prison, after the affliction of many blows, was slain with the sword by King Claudius. At Nicomedia, the birthday of Dula, the handmaid of a certain soldier, who was slain for her chastity. In the island of Antrum of Saint Hermelandus, abbot, whose glorious manner of life is praised by the proclamation of miracles.



## The seventh day before the Kalends · 26 March

[0875]

At Pentapolis of Libya, the birthday of the saints Theodorus, bishop, Hireneus, deacon, Serapion and Ammonius, readers. At Rome on the Lavican Way, of Saint Castolus, martyr, who, as is read in the acts of blessed Sebastian, hung up by the persecutors three times, heard three times, persevering in the confession of the Lord, was sent into a pit, and, a mass of sand being let down upon him, passed to Christ by martyrdom. At Sirmium, of the saints Montanus, presbyter, and Maxima, drowned in the sea.

## The sixth day before the Kalends · 27 March

[0879]

In Egypt, the deposition of blessed John, hermit, who, among the other marks of virtues, full also of the prophetic spirit, foretold to the most Christian emperor Theodosius his victories over the tyrant. In Pannonia, of Saint Alexander, martyr. [Bouillart adds: [nt: That Saint Eucherius ought to have been placed by Usuardus on this day, Castellanus and Sollerius not wrongly deny. But that he was placed there, no one but an obstinate man, or one plainly a stranger in judging scripts, will deny. If Usuardus sinned, it is at his own peril. Bouillart.] On this same day, of Saint Eucherius, bishop of Tours.]

## The fifth day before the Kalends · 28 March

[0881]

In Caesarea of Palestine, of the holy martyrs Priscus, Malchus, Alexander, who in the persecution of Valerian, kindled by the divine heat of faith, going of their own accord to the judge, rebuke him for his savagery against the blood of the godly; whom he at once gave to the beasts to be devoured for the name of Christ. At the city of the Cabilonenses, the deposition of Saint Guntramnus, king, who so gave himself over to spiritual works that, leaving behind the pomps of the world, he paid out his treasures to churches and to the poor. At Tarsus of Cilicia, of Castor and Dorotheus.

## The fourth day before the Kalends · 29 March

[0883]

At Africa, the birthday of the holy confessors Armogastus, Archinimus and Satyrus, who, in the time of the Vandal persecution, under King Geisericus, having endured many and grievous punishments and reproaches for the confession of the truth, [0885] fulfilled the course of a glorious contest. On this same day, the deposition of Eustasius, abbot of the monastery *Luxoviensis*, who was the Father of almost six hundred monks, and, conspicuous for holiness of life, shone also with miracles. [Bouillart, after the African martyrs: [nt: This last commemoration of the saints Pastor and Victorinus is written on an erasure in the same hand as the rest of the article: after it a space of two lines and a half is left empty of all writing, nay, so scraped with the knife that not even the eyes of a lynx could detect a trace of any little letter. Other codices lack Pastor and Victorinus, and after the African confessors set a long commemoration (*commemoratiouem*, printed so) of Saint Eustasius. Hence Sollerius's complaints, that Pastor and Victorinus were added, Saint Eustasius expelled, and the codex therefore depraved. Had he said altered, I should find nothing to blame; for I freely confess that the Nicomedian (*Nicomendienses*, printed so) martyrs were absent from the Caroline autograph and that Saint Eustasius was present. But how would Sollerius prove that the codex was therefore depraved? Is it because, as he says, Pastor and Victorinus have been torn away from a larger band? But of the codices which he cites in great number there are scarcely two that agree with one another about that band, so that to Sollerius himself the number seems to be changed at will. Doubtless the other codices could with impunity increase and diminish the band at will; the Pratensis alone is at fault (*vftio*, printed so). I pass over what he adds, that those two martyrs are passed over by the other codices. For first, that is false; for the Rosweydinus and the Aquicinctinus, which Sollerius judges to be of the best mark, record them among others. The Gellone martyrology, too, made public by our d'Achery, records them. I do not add the exemplars of the Prés: that would be number, not authority. They are had, moreover, by the Matricula Carthus.-Ultraject. and the Galesinian edition. Next, even if they were lacking in all the codices, nothing would follow from that against the Pratensis. It is a correction of which the other Churches either were not advised, or which, being advised, they neglected. I do not doubt that Usuardus reserved Saint Eustasius for the second day of April for just causes, although Ado of Vienne placed him on this day. Without doubt he saw Acts which have now perished. Perhaps too he was led to it by the Hieronymian lists, whose most ancient codex, which I have before my eyes, is silent about Eustasius today and commemorates him on the second of April. Bouillart.] In the city of Nicomedia, the passion of the saints Pastor and Victorinus.]

## The third day before the Kalends · 30 March

[0887]

At Rome on the Appian Way, the passion of blessed Quirinus, tribune and martyr, who under the emperor Aurelian, after the cutting out of his tongue and hanging on the rack, and the cutting off of his hands and feet, consummated the contest of martyrdom by the sword. At Thessalonica, the birthday of the saints Domninus, and Victor. [Bouillart: [nt: Most codices add to Domninus as companion Victor, who was never a companion of Domninus. Ours first, followed by the Rosweyd., the Marchian., the Pratenses B, D, E, and the Conchensis, indicated the true companions, namely Filopolus and Achaicus. But by I know not what fate it happened that Usuardus, not knowing them at first, put I know not whom there; but afterwards, instructed by new information, he excluded him and gave room to the two others. And this is enough for Sollerius to strike the Pratensis codex off the roll of the pure, to affirm that Usuardus's sense has vanished, and to ascribe the correction to some smatterer. In vain will you show him the same hand: his codices give Victor. Filopolus and Achaicus, therefore, are not Usuardus's. And so the Pratensis codex must lose the title of autograph, because Usuardus, as soon as he had emended anything, did not take care to have it posted at all the crossroads of all cities, so that what he himself had corrected others too might correct. Nor is this the only fault in this article that Sollerius reproaches. He is also indignant that Saint Regulus, bishop of Senlis, was erased. He was certainly erased, and thrown back to the ninth day before the Kalends of May, on which day the Church of Senlis keeps his deposition. For what cause Usuardus changed the place of the commemoration will be told there. Bouillart.] At Thessalonica, the birthday of the saints Domninus, Filopolus and Achaicus, *omitting what follows.*] At the fortress of the Silvanectenses, the deposition of Saint Regulus, bishop and confessor.

## The day before the Kalends · 31 March

[0891]

Of Amos the prophet, whom Ozias, king of Israel, killed, pierced through the temples with a bar, and afterwards, half alive, he was carried to his homeland and there was buried. At Rome, of Saint Balbina, virgin, daughter of Quirinus the martyr, who, after the course of this world was overcome, is buried on the Appian Way beside her father. In Africa, of the saints Diodolus and Anesius.

## APRIL HAS 30 DAYS.

[0893]

## On the Kalends · 1 April

[0893]

At Rome, the passion of most blessed Theodora, sister of the most illustrious martyr Hermes. She, martyred under the emperor Aurelian, was buried beside her brother on the Salarian Way, not far from the city of Rome. On the same day, of Saint venantius, bishop and martyr. In Egypt, of the saints Victor and Stephen.

## The fourth day before the Nones · 2 April

[0897]

At Caesarea of Cappadocia, the passion of Saint Theodosia, virgin, who, in the time of Diocletian, joining herself of her own accord to the confessors in custody, was seized and nonetheless tortured on the rack, by the power of God afterwards rescued from chains, waters, beasts, at the last completed her martyrdom by the cutting off of her head. On the same day, the birthday of blessed Nicetius, bishop of Lyon, whose life shone with miracles, and whose precious death is nonetheless commended by miracles. At Palestine, [nt: Sirmond had once read Mary the Egyptian in the third place, and in the fourth Saint Eustasius. Afterwards Castellanus wrote to Sollerius that Mary the Egyptian had been struck out and Eustasius put in her place. For my part I pity the case of an author who uses other men's eyes. For how can these things be reconciled? If Sirmond read Mary the Egyptian, how was she struck out? If she was struck out, how did Sirmond read her? For my part, had I been in Sollerius's place, this alone would have brought it about that I should put no faith in Castellanus's eyes. Now I teach Sollerius how the codex stands in this place. The last two syllables of the word 'commendatur', the whole commemoration of Mary the Egyptian, and these words, 'item sancti Eustasi', lie on an erasure: of the following, 'abbatis monasterii Luxoviensis', the first runs out into the inner margin, the other two into the lower margin. All in the same hand, but in another ink; another, as I suppose, because the first was beginning to fail. Bouillart.] of Saint Mary the Egyptian, who is called the sinner. [Bouillart adds: Also of Saint Eustasius, abbot of the monastery *Luxoviensis*.]

## The third day before the Nones · 3 April

[0901]

In Scithia, in the city of Thomis, the birthday of the saints Evagrius and Benignus. At Thessalonica, the passion of the holy virgins Agapes and Chionia under Diocletian, who, first wasted in prison, afterwards sent into the fire, but untouched by the flames, after prayer poured out to the Lord, gave up their souls. At Tauromenium of Sicily, of blessed Pancratius.

## The day before the Nones · 4 April

[0903]

At Milan, the deposition of blessed Ambrose, bishop and confessor, by whose zeal, among the other marks of doctrine and of miracles, in the time of the Arian perfidy, the whole of Italy was converted to the catholic faith. At Seville, the deposition of Saint Isidore, prelate.

## On the Nones · 5 April

[0905]

At Egypt, the birthday of the holy martyrs Martiana, Nicanor, and Apollonius. At Thessalonica, of Saint Hirene, virgin, who, after enduring prison, was struck with an arrow by Sisinnius the count, under whom her sisters also, Agapes and Chionia, were martyred together. At Caesarea of Licia, of Saint Amphianus.

## The eighth day before the Ides · 6 April

[0909]

At Rome, the birthday of blessed Sixtus, pope and martyr, who in the times of Hadrian, that he might gain Christ for himself, willingly endured temporal death. In Macedonia, of the saints Timotheus and Diogenes.

## The seventh day before the Ides · 7 April

[0911]

At Africa, the birthday of the saints Epiphanius, bishop, Donatus and thirteen others. On the same day, of Egesippus, a most holy man, who, near to the times of the Apostles, wove together all the histories of ecclesiastical deeds from the passion of the Lord up to his own age, so that he might express also the manner of speaking of those whose life he followed. At Alexandria, of Saint Pelusius, presbyter.

## The sixth day before the Ides · 8 April

[0915]

At Corinth, of blessed Dionisius, bishop, by whose learning and grace, which he had in the word of God, many profit even to this day. And this chosen one of Christ likewise shone in the times of Marcus Antoninus and Lucius Aurelius. At Tours, of Saint Perpetuus, bishop, a man of admirable holiness.

## The fifth day before the Ides · 9 April

[0917]

The birthday of blessed Procorus, who was one of the first seven deacons; he, renowned in faith and miracles, was consummated by martyrdom at Antioch. At Sirmium, the passion of the seven holy virgins, who, paying together the price of their blood, purchased eternal life.

## The fourth day before the Ides · 10 April

[0919]

Of Ezekiel the prophet, who, slain by the judge of the people of Israel at Babylonia, was buried in the tomb of Sem and Arfaxad. At Rome, of very many blessed martyrs, whom Saint Alexander, pope, baptized when he was held in prison. All these the emperor Aurelian caused to be put on board an old ship, to be led out into the deep sea, and there, stones being tied to their necks, to be sunk in the depth of the sea. At Alexandria, of Saint Appolonius, presbyter, and five others.

## The third day before the Ides · 11 April

[0921]

At Rome, the birthday of blessed Leo, pope, in whose times there was the holy synod of Chalcedon. At Crete, in the city of Gortina, of Saint Philip, bishop, who was endowed with great virtues and the best studies. And he flourished [0923] in the times of the emperors Antoninus Verus and Lucius Aurelius. In Dalmatia, in the city of Salona, of Saint Domio, bishop, with eight soldiers. At Nicomedia, of Saint Eustorgius, presbyter.

## The day before the Ides · 12 April

[0925]

At Rome on the Aurelian Way, the birthday of blessed Julius, pope, who, having endured tribulations and exiles for ten months under the emperor Constantius, after his death returned with great glory to his see, and rested in peace. [Bouillart inserts: On the same day, [nt: The mention of Zeno, although made on another leaf, shows the same form of letters, the same ink, the same parchment, so that only a blind man, or a most unskilled judge of scripts, could blurt out that it was intruded after Usuardus. No erasure, a clean character, nothing that could cast suspicion into even captious judges. Almost all the codices known to Sollerius support it. Of those I have gone through, none dissents: four of the Prés of the best mark, two of which exceed five hundred years, two Victorine, the Conchensis, that of Pontoise, the Feuillant A, B, the Colbertine A, B, C, D, that of Fossés: the books more correctly and accurately edited agree, as Sollerius admits: an ancient martyrology written at the beginning of the eleventh century and carefully kept at Paris in the royal priory of Saint-Martin gives the same reading: the Roman Martyrology commemorates the same Zeno on the same day. And shall a reading propped by so many supports totter and be imperilled? Without doubt Sollerius saw codices to set against the Pratensis. So it is: he saw two, the Heriniensis and the Tornacensis; let him add the Dervensis too, it is nothing to me. It was no concern of the other Churches that whatever had been emended by Usuardus they too should emend. But, destitute of codices, he fights perhaps with arguments, and those indeed such as cannot be answered. He must be heard. Very rarely, he says, does Usuardus summon Transalpine saints. What then, pray? If very rarely, then sometimes. And Zeno will be one of those. But Usuardus's narrative is more than doubtful. Why then did Henschenius hesitate in doubt whether to assert Zeno pontiff and confessor only, or martyr as well? Has Sollerius found out anything new? But Henschenius pronounces expressly, with no argument indeed, but yet expressly pronounces, that Zeno was intruded by later men. I would not dare to answer. And what will the reader think of this urbanity of Sollerius? I would dare to suspect that there was someone, a fellow initiate (symmistes) of Usuardus... who thought his own style must be tempered to Usuardus's. Bouillart.] of Saint Zeno, bishop, who amid the storms of persecution wonderfully ruled the city of Verona, and in the time of Gallienus was crowned with martyrdom.] At Vapingum, the deposition of Constantinus, bishop.

## On the Ides · 13 April

[0929]

At Pergamum, a city of Asia, the birthday of the saints Carpus, bishop. Papirius, deacon, and Agathonica, an excellent woman, and of many other women, who for their blessed confessions were crowned with martyrdom under Antoninus Verus and Aurelius Commodus. With whom also the wonderful man Justin the philosopher, labouring very much in writing for the religion of Christ, received the gift of martyrdom as the reward of a faithful tongue. In Spain, of Saint Erminigildus, who, for the confession of the catholic faith, struck on the head with an axe, entered the heavenly kingdom in place of the earthly [sic: *terterreno*], a king and martyr. [Bouillart, at the edge of the page: On the same day at the monastery of Saint Germanus, the consecration of the altar in honour of the holy and undivided Trinity and of the life-giving cross, and also of the most blessed Mother of God, Mary, and of Saint Guandregisilus, and also of all the saints.]

## The eighteenth day before the Kalends · 14 April

[0933]

At Rome on the Appian Way, the birthday of the most blessed martyrs Tiburtius, Valerian and Maximus, Almachius being prefect, of whom the first were beaten with cudgels, struck with the sword, the last was beaten with leaded scourges so long, until he breathed out his spirit. At Alexandria, of Saint Fronto, abbot, whose life stood forth glorious in holiness and miracles. At Interamna, of blessed Proculus, martyr. Also, of Saint Domnina, virgin, crowned with her companion virgins.

## The seventeenth day before the Kalends · 15 April

[0935]

At Persis, in the city of Cordula, the birthday of the saints Olympias, and Maximus, nobles, who at the command of Decius were beaten with cudgels, and then with leaded scourges, at the last their heads were beaten with axes, until they gave up their spirit. In Italy, of the blessed martyrs Maro, Euticetis and Victorinus, who, first leading a long exile at the island Pontia in the confession of Christ, afterwards under the emperor Nerva, when they had converted very many to the faith, were ordered to be slain by various punishments.

## The sixteenth day before the Kalends · 16 April

[0937]

At Corinth, the birthday of the saints Callistus and Carisius, with seven others, all drowned in the sea. At Caesaraugusta, of the eighteen holy martyrs Quintilianus, Cassianus, Matutinus, Publius, Urbanus, Martialis, [0939] Faustus, Successus, Felix, Januarius, Primitivus, Evotus, Cecilianus, Optatus, Fronto, Lupercus, Apodemus, and Julius. These all together, under Datianus, governor of the Spains, were afflicted with punishments and slain.

## The fifteenth day before the Kalends · 17 April

[0941]

At Africa, the birthday of Saint Mappalicus, martyr, who, as blessed Cyprian writes in the epistle to the martyrs and confessors, was crowned with many others. At Antioch, of the holy martyrs Peter, deacon, and Hermogenes. [Bouillart inserts: [nt: In the Pratensis codex, between the Antiochene and the Cordoban martyrs, mention is made of Nicephorus. In the same place the manuscripts Aquicinct., Bruxell. and Rosweyd., three of the Prés B, D, E, the Conchensis, the Montisburg. and the Lubeck-Cologne edition made mention of him. Yet the Pratensis was not worthy for Sollerius to follow, both on account of other codices which lack Nicephorus, and most of all because, as Castellanus advised, what is said of Nicephorus was wholly intruded, and that by a hand not very ancient. Am I to hear so often of the same thing? Am I so often to deafen the reader about the same thing? But here I wish Sollerius to learn more about our codex from me than he learned from Castellanus. The last line of the page, where Peter the deacon and Hermogenes are now seen, was once almost wholly erased, and restored in another hand, though one nearest to the age of Usuardus, and in another ink. Let Sollerius turn over his notes again. Perhaps his informant said of those martyrs what he himself understands of Nicephorus. Next, the first two lines of the following page, where Nicephorus and the Cordoban monks are now read, were likewise erased. But let me have credit with Sollerius that the hand which wrote those saints is the very same as that of the rest of the codex; in a smaller form of letters, however, so that room might be given to Nicephorus, whom Usuardus brought in here, deceived beyond doubt by certain Acts which falsely claimed that the feast of Nicephorus was kept on this day. Certainly in a manuscript Collection of Acts I read this title prefixed to the Acts of Saint Nicephorus: The Passion of Saint Nicephorus, martyr, which is kept on the fifteenth day before the Kalends of May. Bouillart.] In the East, of blessed Nicephorus, crowned under Valerian and Gallienus for the martyrdom of Christ.] Also at Cordoba, of the holy martyrs Helias, presbyter, Paul and Isidore, monks.



## The fourteenth day before the Kalends · 18 April

[0945]

At Messana, a city of Apulia, the birthday of the holy martyrs Eleutherius, bishop, and Anthia his mother, who, since he was illustrious both for holiness of life and for the power of miracles, under the emperor Hadrian, overcoming a fiery iron bed, a gridiron and a frying pan boiling with oil, pitch, and resin, thrown also to lions, but unharmed by them, at the last has his throat cut together with his mother. At Rome, of blessed Apollonius, senator, who under the emperor Commodus, betrayed by a slave as being a Christian, composed a notable volume, which he read in the senate, and then by sentence of the senate was beheaded for Christ. At Cordoba, of Saint Perfectus, presbyter and martyr.

## The thirteenth day before the Kalends · 19 April

[0947]

[0947]Of blessed Thimo, deacon, of the first seven, who first settled as a teacher at Beroea, and then, sowing the word of the Lord, came to Corinth, and there by Jews and Greeks, as is handed down, was first cast into flames, but was harmed in nothing, then, fastened to a cross, fulfilled his martyrdom. In Armenia, in the city of Militana, the birthday of the holy martyrs Hermogenes, Gaius, expeditus, Aristonicus, Rufus, Galatae, crowned on one day. In the city of Caucoliberi, the passion of Saint Vincent, martyr. At the monastery of Laubiae, of Saint Ursmarus, bishop and confessor. [Bouillart: . . . Vincent, martyr. [nt: Sollerius here gives two causes why he judged the Pratensis codex less suited to representing Usuardus: the one of which he himself judges useless; but the other would have been enough for everyone except Sollerius to choose the Pratensis. One of them, then, is that the Pratensis adds to the present article the Dedication of the church in honour of Saint Symphorianus, martyr, and of the most blessed Nicolaus, Conf. And how much he ought to have thought that reason worth he himself declares to us in these words: although Castellanus attests that this dedication was added in a more recent hand, and Sirmond indicates the same by drawing lines under it, nor do the keepers of the autograph deny it. The other is that for 'Coenobio Laubiis' it has 'Pago Hainoensi'. Yet nothing is more usual with Usuardus than to indicate the district for a monastery that is situated in the district, so much that he seems to have affected it. Thus, besides this place: IV Kal. Jan., in the district *Oximensis*; VI Kal. May, in the district of Pontivus, for at the monastery of Centula; V Id. Jul., in the district *Cinomannicus*, for at the monastery of Aninsula; XI Kal. Aug., in the district of Rouen, for at the monastery of Fontanella; III Kal. Sept., in the district of Meaux, for at the monastery of Resbacum, etc. It is true indeed that Sollerius left nothing untried to wrest all these places from us; but we have already given such specimens of his industry that without doubt the reader foresees with what outcome he assailed them all. Bouillart.] In the district *Hainoensis*, of Saint Orsmarus, bishop and confessor. *And in cursive type:* At the monastery of Saint Germanus, the dedication of the church in honour of Saint Simphorianus, martyr, and of the most blessed Nicolaus, confessor.]

## The twelfth day before the Kalends · 20 April

[0951]

At Rome, the birthday of Saint Victor, pope, who, fifteenth after blessed Peter, ruled the Church ten years, and under the emperor Severus is crowned with martyrdom. Also at Rome, of the holy martyrs Sulpitius and Servilianus, who, converted to the faith of Christ by the preaching and miracles of Domitilla, virgin, when they would not sacrifice to idols, were beheaded by Anianus, prefect of the City. In the Gauls, in the city of Ebredunum, of Saint Marcellus, bishop and confessor of the same city, who, by divine command, coming from Africa with his holy companions Vincent and Domninus, converted to the faith of Christ the greatest part [sic: *pratem*] of the Maritime Alps, by the word and by admirable signs, with which he shines even to this day. [Bouillart adds, in cursive type: On the same day, at the monastery of Saint Germanus, the revelation of the body of Saint George, monk of Bethlehem and martyr, and of Saint Venantius, abbot.]

## The eleventh day before the Kalends · 21 April

[0955]

At Persis, the birthday of blessed Simeon, bishop and martyr, who, at the command of Sapor, king of the Persians, seized and loaded with iron, when he testified of the Lord with a free and most constant voice, first wasted in a prison dungeon with a hundred others, of whom some were bishops, some presbyters, some clerics of divers orders, at the last was ordered to be beheaded together with them all. There suffered with him also certain most illustrious men, Ustazadis, Abdella, Ananias and Pusitius, with a daughter, who was a holy virgin. At Alexandria, of the saints Arator, presbyter, Fortunus, Felix, Silvius, Vitalis, who rested in prison.

## The tenth day before the Kalends · 22 April

[0957]

At Rome on the Appian Way, the birthday of blessed Gaius, pope, who, when he had ruled the Church eleven years, four months, twelve days, was crowned with martyrdom under the emperor Diocletian. At Persis, of the holy martyrs who had their throats cut with the sword for the name of Christ under King Sapor. In which contest of the faith there suffered Melisius, bishop, Acepsimas also, bishop, with James, presbyter. Mareas and Bicor, no less bishops, with clerics about two hundred and fifty, with monks also and very many consecrated virgins. Among whom also the sister of Simeon the bishop, Tarbua by name, with her maidservant, was cut through with a saw. In the city of Cordula, the birthday [0959] of Parmenius, Helimenae and Chrisotelus, presbyters, Luke and Mucius, deacons, the triumph of whose martyrdom is contained in the passion of blessed Lawrence. At Lyon, of Saint Epipodius, who, in the persecution of Antoninus Verus, after grievous torments inflicted upon him, completed his martyrdom by the cutting off of his head. [Bouillart adds: [nt: There are few articles, if indeed any, over whose preparation Sollerius sweated more. The codices he surveyed (and he surveyed nearly eighty) were all so faulty that he dared trust none at all, and all had to be collated together so that he might draw the text out of each. The collation of each, he himself says, has given (*dubit*, printed so) the simplest text that could be. Let others praise the labour; I vehemently admire the acumen and judgment. For in such depravation of the codices, who would not wonder that Sollerius could so know Usuardus's sense that he did not depart from it even a nail's breadth, and rendered the autograph itself word for word? Certainly someone will suspect that, while he was working on this article, he had before his eyes the apograph which he keeps by him, and copied it out at least as far as 'Senones'. He ought to have copied it out whole. This last commemoration was not indeed in the Caroline autograph. For the Dervensis codex lacks it. But that it is of the same hand as the rest of the article not even Sollerius denies. And on this very day the Church of Sens honours the memory of Saint Leo, the more ancient Martyrologies record it, Saussay's more recent one celebrates it with a eulogy. He is that very Saint Leo who, when King Childebert wished to set up a bishop at Melun, where there had never been a bishop, resisted with a noble spirit, having written him a letter which Sirmond published in tom. I of the Councils of Gaul. Bouillart.] At Senones, of Saint Leo, bishop. *And in cursive type:* On the same day, the finding of the holy martyrs Dionysius, Rusticus and Eleutherius.]

## The ninth day before the Kalends · 23 April

[0963]

In Persis, in the city of Diospolis, the passion of Saint George, martyr, the acts of whose passion, although they are numbered among the apocryphal writings, yet the Church of God reverently honours his most illustrious martyrdom among the crowns of the martyrs. In the Gauls, in the city of Valentia, the birthday of the saints Felix, presbyter, Fortunatus and Achilleus, deacons, who, when they had converted the greatest part of the aforesaid city to the faith of Christ, were thrust into prison by the duke Cornelius, then beaten very long, and, their legs broken, bound about the whirling of wheels, having endured smoke also in their hanging on the rack, at the last were consummated by the sword. [Bouillart adds: [nt: In the Caroline autograph there was written: at the fortress of the Silvanectenses, the deposition of Saint Regulus, bishop and confessor. Here simply, bishop and confessor. Why did he omit 'deposition'? For there was space enough left for it to be added. Here I recognize the acumen and sagacity of Usuardus. He had certainly read the acts of Saint Regulus: but when he saw them full of fables, and that no faith could safely be placed in them, he consulted the Church which ought to have committed the deeds of Regulus and the day of his death to memory with the greater care. That Church, however, agrees so little with the Caroline autograph that it venerates the deposition on this day and the translation on 30 March. What was Usuardus to do? He deleted what he had written on XXX March. And lest, by marking the deposition which the Acts record today, he should be deceived, he held it enough to note the day sacred to Saint Regulus. Bouillart.] At the fortress of Silvaenectis, of Saint Regulus, bishop and confessor.]

## The eighth day before the Kalends · 24 April

[0967]

At Lyon of Gaul, the birthday of Saint Alexander, martyr, who, in the persecution of Antoninus Verus, after the custody of prison, was first so torn by the cruelty of those beating him that, the framework of his ribs loosened, his bowels laid open, the inward parts of his body were exposed. Then, fastened to the gibbet of the cross, breathless, he sent forth his blessed spirit. There suffered with him also others to the number of thirty-four. On the same day, the deposition of Saint Mellitus, bishop, in Britain. Also in the city of Heliberri, of Saint Gregory, bishop and confessor.

## The seventh day before the Kalends · 25 April

[0969]

At Rome, the Greater Litany at Saint Peter. At Alexandria, the birthday of blessed Mark the evangelist. He, disciple and interpreter of the apostle Peter, being asked at Rome by the brethren, wrote the Gospel, which having taken up, he went to Egypt, and, first at Alexandria proclaiming Christ, founded a Church, and afterwards, seized for the faith of Christ and grievously afflicted, first strengthened by an angelic visitation, then, the Lord himself appearing to him, he was called to the heavenly kingdoms. And he died in the eighth year of Nero. In the city of Syracuse, of the saints Evodius and Hermogenes [Bouillart, at the edge of the page: On this same day, at Paris, the translation of the body of blessed Droctoveus, abbot, disciple of the most blessed Germanus, confessor and pontiff.]

## The sixth day before the Kalends · 26 April

[0973]

At Rome, the birthday of blessed Anacletus, pope who, second after the apostle Peter, when he had ruled the Church twelve years, was crowned with martyrdom in the persecution of Domitian. Also at Rome, of Saint Marcellinus, pontiff, who, when he had ruled the Church nine years and four months, was beheaded by Diocletian for the faith of Christ, with Claudius, Cirinus and Antoninus. At which time there was a great persecution, so that within one month seventeen thousand were crowned. [nt: Here the unfortunate Pratensis codex could not obtain from Sollerius a place among the pure, and that on account of the mention of Saint Richarius, which, although he does not deny that it is by the same scribe, he was advised had been made in another and more yellowing ink; the fairness of that judge! Bouillart.] At the monastery of Centula [Bouillart: in the district of Pontivus], of Saint Richarius, presbyter and confessor.

## The fifth day before the Kalends · 27 April

[0977]

At Rome, the deposition of blessed Anastasius, pope, of whom Saint Jerome testifies in venerable speech that the world was unworthy to enjoy his life for long. At Nicomedia, the birthday of Saint Anthimus, bishop and martyr, who, in the persecution of Diocletian, for the confession of Christ, as is described in the ecclesiastical history, received the glory of martyrdom by the cutting off of his head. There followed him also almost the whole multitude of his flock, by the same way of martyrdom, of whom the judge caused some to be cut down with the sword, some to be burned up with fires, some to be put in small boats and sunk in the sea. At Tarsus of Cilicia, of Saint Castor.

## The fourth day before the Kalends · 28 April

[0979]

At Ravenna, the birthday of Saint Vitalis, martyr, who, when he had buried with honour the body of blessed Ursicinus, taken up, seized by Paulinus the consular, after the torments of the rack, was ordered to be put down into a deep pit, and to be crushed with earth and stones, and by such a martyrdom passed to Christ. At Alexandria, of Saint Theodora, virgin, who, scorning to sacrifice, when she had been handed over into a brothel, suddenly a certain one of the brethren, Didimus by name, by the wonderful favour of God, snatched her away, and afterwards was struck down together with her, and crowned with her. On the same day, of Afrodisius, Carilippus, Agapius and Eusebius, martyrs. In Pannonia, of Saint Pollio, martyr.

## The third day before the Kalends · 29 April

[0983]

At Paphos, of Saint Tychicus, deacon, disciple of blessed Paul. Of him the same Apostle makes mention in his epistles, declaring him to be his dearest brother and fellow servant in the Lord. In Numidia, at the colony *Cirtensis*, the birthday of the holy martyrs Agapius and Secundinus, bishops, who, in the persecution of Valerian, after a long exile, at the aforesaid city, in which the rage of the gentiles was then most eagerly gaping to try the faith of the just, from illustrious priesthood were made glorious martyrs. There suffered in their company Emilianus, a soldier, Tertulla and Antonia, holy virgins, and a certain woman with her twins.

## The day before the Kalends · 30 April

[0987]

At the city *Lambesitana*, the birthday of the holy martyrs Marianus, reader, and James, deacon, of whom the former, when he had long before overcome the assault of the Decian persecution in the confession of Christ, again seized with his dearest colleague. Then, after dire and exquisite punishments, wonderfully strengthened and relieved a second time by divine revelations, at the last they were consummated by the sword with many others. In the city of Sanctonas, of blessed Euprobus, martyr, whom, consecrated with the grace of the pontifical order, Saint Clement sent [sic: *dixerit*] into the Gauls, and, his preaching accomplished, for the testimony of Christ, his head dashed, he fell a victor.
